BY TAWANDA TAFIRENYIKA SCOTLAND-based Zimbabwean striker David Moyo is battling relegation worries with his team Hamilton Academical, battling to stay afloat. Hamilton Academical earned a point on Wednesday in a 1-1 draw with St Johnstone, but it was not enough to help their cause as it consigned them to the foot of the table with 25 points after 30 matches. They share the same points with Kilmarnock, who are on 11th place. However, Hamilton have a game in hand and a win in their next match could open a tiny portal in their struggle to retain premiership status. A team which finishes in 11th place plays the championship play-off winners over two legs, with the winner earning the right to play in the Scottish Premiership the following season The Zimbabwean international joined the Scottish club in the 2019-20 season from Northampton in England. Although he has scored only two goals with two assists in 27 matches, he remains a key player for the club. He played in the last back-to-back 2021 African Cup of Nations qualifiers against the Desert Foxes of Algeria. He started the second leg in Harare before being replaced by Khama Billiat in the second half, with the match ending in a 2-2 stalemate. Although he has been included in the Warriors squad to face Botswana and Zambia this month, his availability remains uncertain due to the stringent conditions imposed by the United Kingdom (UK) because of COVID-19, with those returning to the country from countries like Zimbabwe and Botswana set to be quarantined for 10 days at a hotel. With world football governing body giving clubs powers to refuse or release players for international duty, he is among several players in the UK unlikely to report for camp. Zimbabwe, who take on Botswana on March 22, before hosting Zambia a week later, are in second place in Group H with five points behind Algeria who have already qualified on 10 points, leaving the trio of Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia to battle for the remaining slot in the group. Botswana are third on four points with Zambia at the foot of the table with three points. The Warriors though have an advantage as they can seal a place at the finals with a win over Botswana provided Zambia fail to beat Algeria.