BY TATENDA CHITAGU THE Zimbabwe Republic Police and the Masvingo City Council (MCC) municipal police on Tuesday arrested five members of a pressure group over a petition that they sent to the city fathers demanding reversal of a 500% hike in rates. Two members of the Masvingo Residents Forum were released without charge, while the other three, Tamutswa Chikonyora, Leeroy Taylor and Esther Thomu were detained at Masvingo Central Police Station. Provincial police spokesperson Inspector Kudakwashe Dhewa could not be reached for comment over the arrests. However, NewsDay witnessed the arrests. A fortnight ago, the local authority held a feedback meeting with residents’ associations and other stakeholders advising them of the tariff hike approved by Local Government minister July Moyo despite objections by residents. In the petition sent to town clerk Edward Mukaratirwa, mayor Collen Maboke, councillors, district development co-ordinator Roy Hove, Masvingo Urban legislator Jacob Nyokanhete (MDC Alliance), as well as Masvingo Provincial Affairs minister Ezra Chadzamira, Masvingo Residents Forum chairperson Brighton Ramusi blasted council for making unilateral
decisions. “We are here today, to peacefully submit our grievances to the MCC due to the fact that our local leaders here dismally failed the residents. “MCC has failed to consult residents on matters of public interest. The local authority is doing things on its own without taking the public into consideration. “This local authority has lost sight and vision of the residents. “The road network is in a sorry state despite that the MCC introduced and collected a roads levy from every household for road maintenance. “This money has not been used for local road maintenance. “MCC collects parking fees again meant for road maintenance. Despite the introduction of the parking fee, potholes and washed away roads remain the order of the day,” read part of the petition. Residents said despite receiving money from Zinara for road maintenance, council had neglected most city roads. They also accused the local authority of failing to consider COVID-19 shocks on residents before hiking rates, and of constructing houses on wetlands, leading to flooding in Runyararo West suburb.