BY SALLY NYAKANYANGA It was a double-edged sword for most learners in the southern African country of Zimbabwe, who recently completed crucial national examinations, as they had to grapple with, on the one hand, the deadly COVID-19, claiming numerous lives on a daily basis, and, on the other, a seemingly endless strike by teachers demanding decent wages and working conditions. As she lay in the little home which she shares with her mother and brother on the eve of her “O” Level Biology and Chemistry examinations, Margaret (17) was in the throes of fear. She felt weak, had a dry cough and was feverish. Her petrified mind alternated between the spectre of a horrible death and the nightmare of surviving the dreaded COVID-19 only to fail her “O” Levels and live a life of misery like her mother. Margaret could not come to terms with her bad luck. How could she have contracted the deadly disease just as she was about to sit for her final public examination? “I had this terrible headache and cold. The thought that I had surely contracted COVID-19 meant I should not go and write my final examinations. But then the realisation that I could not afford to miss this crucial opportunity was even stronger than my fear of COVID-19. Biology and Chemistry were the very subjects that would determine whether I could pursue my dream of becoming a medical doctor or not,” Margaret recalled. Testing COVID-19 positive did not surprise Margaret as two of her classmates had already tested positive to the deadly scourge. The following day, the fear of losing a lifetime opportunity forced Margaret to drag herself to school. However, as soon as she arrived at the examination centre, an alert invigilator noticed that she did not look well. To Margaret’s relief, it was decided that she would be isolated from fellow candidates and take her examinations in a room all by herself. Isolation was now the least of Margaret’s worries, who was only too happy to be allowed to write her examinations. “It was scary as two of my classmates contracted COVID-19, just like six of the few teachers at our school,” reminisces Margaret. “I did not bother seeking medical treatment as it would have been too expensive for my mother. Instead, my mother made me use the traditional remedy of steaming and drinking a herb known as zumbani, popularly used in the country Fortunately for me, my symptoms quickly wore off and I was soon able to continue with my examinations in relatively good health.” Now fully healed, Margaret dreams of changing the plight of her family. She hopes to take care of her mother who single-handedly raised her brother and her with the tiny income she earned from packing sugar at Triangle Estates, a sugar-producing company in the south-eastern district of Chiredzi. She vividly recalls how strange a year 2020 was. She says when schools reopened in September 2020, having been closed since March of that same year due to the deadly pandemic, she was far from ready for her final examinations. Contracting the COVID-19 virus, therefore, just compounded an already dire situation for her. “It was tough because since we reopened, we never had any classes. We were just going to school wearing masks and yet were expected to write examinations. For me, wearing a mask was uncomfortable as it affects one’s normal breathing,” says Margaret. This was the “new normal”, and adapting to it was the only way to survive the pandemic. The odds were, therefore, stacked against Margaret and her fellow learners as they had to grapple with the fear of dying even as they tried to focus on passing a crucial national examination. Despite the school providing sanitisers, masks and enforcing social distancing rules, it had taken a hard knock from the effects of the pandemic. Although her mother managed to pay the US$55 required for her school fees, teachers simply did not turn up to take classes, condemning Margaret to take her examinations having only been taught for three of the four years she had paid for. Seventeen-year-old Lewis Gubudu, who is based in one of Harare’s high-density suburbs and has also written his “O” Level examinations, could not hide his displeasure at the way the situation was handled by the authorities. According to him, Zimbabwe’s learners are at “a dead-end with nowhere to run”. “I was afraid to go to school because there were no sanitisers and enough running water to wash our hands, with no one to monitor or supervise us as most teachers did not report for duty. It could have been wise for the government to opt for online learning with no charges to learners,” he opined. Amalgamated Rural Teachers Union of Zimbabwe (Artuz) president Obert Masaraure, who at one point was arrested for organising and leading a civil action against government, concurred that the examinations were conducted in a highly unsafe environment as schools have become the epicentre of the highly infectious respiratory disease. “Learners, who were never fully prepared for examinations, face another hazard of contracting the virus as they undertake shambolic Zimbabwe School Examinations Council examinations (Zimsec). As such, the learner unpreparedness, Zimsec manufactured chaos and the risk of contracting the virus definitely traumatised the learners. The examinations do not serve any other purpose beyond just ticking the box,” Masaraure argues. Artuz national executive secretary Guthrie Mhandu said above 600 learners and 168 teachers and support staff tested positive for COVID-19, of which 36 teachers and 52 heads passed on. “The Ministries of Primary and Secondary Education (MoPSE) and Ministry of Health and Child Care (MoHCC) are not putting effort to provide comprehensive school health services as this is pronounced by the lack of running water, personal protective equipment, fumigation of schools and testing of both teachers and learners,” he said. Distress of guardians Meanwhile, Lewis’s father, David Gubudu (39), struggled to raise $2 000 (US$24) using bank rate) for his son’s school fees. He, however, had no option but to simply go out there and raise the money as he had already managed to pay the examination fee, money which would have gone down the drain had he failed to pay the school fees since, without paying school fees, his son would not have been allowed to sit for his final examinations. “The situation is even tougher for us parents as we struggle to raise money for our children as we are not working and currently the government has imposed more than a whole month’s lockdown since January this year such that we cannot sell our goods or anything,” he said. “Even when we try to set up markets to sell our goods, they are confiscated and we are totally banned from earning a living.” Gubudu, who survives on buying and selling basic commodities as he is unemployed, found himself in a quandary as he had absolutely no income and yet still had to assume his responsibilities as a father amid a pandemic that has disrupted all economic activities in the country. Despite the country experiencing a second and even deadlier wave of the pandemic, he had no choice as a father but to go out there and fend for his family, he said. “Our children are at high risk of contracting the deadly scourge because in schools, there is only green bar soap given by government. It’s daylight robbery as last year, we paid first term fees in full, but our children were only taught half of the school term, with the last term having no teachers as they were on strike. “This shows how our education system is in tatters as our children wrote their final examinations for things they were not taught. At the same time, when the schools opened last year in September, teachers went on strike, putting our children at a disadvantage. One wonders what exactly our children were expected to write without having been taught anything. How did they expect our children to sit for examinations for things they don’t know?” he asked rhetorically. Though some parents could afford extra lessons for their children during the time when schools were closed, many could not afford to pay for these lessons as teachers sought to capitalise on the situation by charging US$10 per subject, making it beyond the reach of many. So far 36 089 people have tested positive, with 32 666 recoveries and 1 463 deaths. Cry the forgotten teacher According to the 2020 Labour Justice Index Report, the economic instability that has beset Zimbabwe for decades has hit labour hardest. Various drivers, such as staff rationalisation and wage bill reduction, have seen workers surviving on starvation wages. Faced with such unbearable adversities, the only recourse left for employees is to resort to collective action to air their grievances and express their dissatisfaction. However, any such industrial action has been invariably met with State heavy-handedness. Ever since schools reopened at the end of 2020, 13 Artuz members have been in and out of prison. When schools re-opened late last year in the aftermath of the COVID-19-induced shutdown, teachers immediately declared “incapacitation” and refused to return to their workstations, arguing that their salaries were a mockery. Nation Mudzitirwa, an economics teacher at Fatima High School in Matabeleland North province and spokesperson of a teachers’ union, concurred, saying they were earning a gross salary of $18 000 (US$216), which is inclusive of the US$75 COVID-19 allowance. If the allowance is removed, teachers would get a paltry $12 000 (US$144). “As teachers, we are not demanding a salary increase, but a restoration of the 2018 October salary, which was pegged at US$520 per month,” he said. Demanding a fair wage and better working conditions are rights enshrined in section 65 of the country’s Constitution. Education system in Zimbabwe Mudzitirwa is of the view that the result of government intransigence is the continuous deterioration of the quality of education in the country. “This implies that our education system is collapsing as students who are produced are academically half-baked and this has a great danger to the country at large as students will not be able to invent new things and drive the country’s economy forward. As such, it’s going to be a generation of students with certificates that don’t add value to their lives and the country at large,” says Mudzitirwa. He claims that after the 2020 lockdown, the majority of teachers never went back to schools, leaving only a handful of teachers who reside in school cottages to attend to learners. Hence teachers are of the view that there was no need to rush opening of schools when coronavirus was not fully contained, at the same time without fully addressing the teachers’ grievances. The responsible authorities could have come up with a model that accommodates both 2020/2021 examination classes since learners did not cover their syllabi, with the Grade Seven national results a case in point, whereby only 37% of the learners passed across the country. Further, the situation is widening the inequality gap in the education sector as kids from economically disadvantaged backgrounds will not be learning whilst students from elite schools will not be affected by the salary impasse between teachers and government. Learners remain hopeful As for Margaret, despite all the setbacks that she suffered, she looks forward to getting good grades in her examinations. “I wrote 10 subjects, of which I had already passed two since I wrote them in June, but I remain hopeful that I am going to get better results, but not the same as I would have achieved if teachers had been there,” she said. She hopes for a brighter future where she will be able to take care of her mother, an unsung heroine who made huge sacrifices for her and her brother to have an education.