BY CHIEDZWA KOWO THE Restaurant Operators Association of Zimbabwe (ROAZ) claims that the restrictive measures put in place by government to contain the spread of COVID-19 have pushed most of its members’ businesses to the brink, with some already shut down. At least half of existing operators could collapse if there is no change of policy, ROAZ president Bongai Zamchiya has said. ROAZ’s warning came a day after President Emmerson Mnangagwa relaxed the country’s lockdown measures, reopened the economy to a large extent, but maintained significant restrictions on restaurants. He said restaurants would not be allowed to have sit-in diners. “We had hoped for re-opening of restaurants in the March 1 update announcement, with permission for half-capacity service for sit-down diners but this has not happened,”  Zamchiya said. ROAZ has carried out research into the effects of lockdowns and a position paper has been tabled with the Environment, Climate Change, Tourism and Hospitality ministry and the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority (ZTA), outlining the severity of the
situation. “We are fully supportive of the national effort to contain and eliminate COVID-19, but the current dispensation for the restaurant trade is no longer tenable and we face a huge level of business closures and job losses, not only in the restaurant trade, but among the many suppliers to the trade,” Zamchiya said. “The travel and tourism sector held a meeting with our minister last week and we hoped he will now take up our cause. Restaurants are key operators in the tourism space, which is a significant economic sector and traditionally earns a billion dollars in foreign currency. “We are active in economic growth and contribute a significant amount to the ZTA’s revenue, which is then used to promote domestic and international tourism. What appears to have been forgotten is that properly-run restaurants have a high level of hygiene and of operational standards, all of which are easily monitored and are highly-regulated anyway,” he said. He said restaurants around the country varied in size from small stand-alone operations to large corporate operations and for many this is their only source of income. While some people considered restaurants a luxury, they were in fact essential operations for many working or disabled people and an important part of business and social life in the community at large. “When we were partially operational in the second half of 2020, we showed that safe and secure dining is possible and easy to achieve, and we are requesting urgent attention to our crisis, and that of our suppliers, from farming through to manufacturing. In fact, most restaurants are faced with full costs related to rentals, wages and other inputs, but we have no income, while those that are able to do takeaways report income of between eight and 20% of pre-lockdown levels. We are, quite literally, at a crossroads and we appeal for urgent attention to avert a disaster for the trade and many of its suppliers,” Zamchiya said.