BY KIMBERLY KARIATI FOR a long time, Chipinge has been known for witchcraft and superstitious tales, but there are also positive stories that come out of the small border town. When it comes to showbiz, there are a lot of talented artistes crying out to beard for the admirable works that they do. Farai Gerald Bapata, a member of the Zim Afro Family outfit, told NewsDay Life & Style that lack of coverage and “unfair treatment” of artistes in his home town had let them down. “There are stereotypes associated with my home town Chipinge and people often refer to us as residents of a regressive town, but being a resident there I know there are talented artistes here who lack exposure,” he said. “I wonder how people expect us to be in the spotlight when we only have one radio station, Diamond FM, which covers us. It is difficult for us to travel to Harare to submit our songs. We strive, but no one recognises us. When you see an artiste residing in Chipinge make it big, just know that they have sacrificed and put in extra work than all the other artistes.” The 23-year-old singer, who has so far released a single Usaneta, said he was proud of the response to the track, but was disheartened by watching potential talent from Chipinge failing to make it to the music scene. “We are not exposed here in Chipinge. In some towns, they host musical or arts awards, but in Chipinge, there is not even one award event that has ever been hosted here. These awards are important because that is where most artistes get recognition. The artistes get more encouraged to keep pushing since they will be working towards achieving something,” he said. “I would like to believe that Chipinge residents also take musical talents for granted, because there are only a few artistes that have been sponsored or promoted by businessmen from around the town. I feel we are undermined by our own local people as they only support you when you are already known, yet during the humble beginnings, they are not willing to help.”