By SIMBARASHE SITHOLE THE farmer vetting and contracting process for the Command Agriculture Programme is set to be reviewed in Mashonaland Central province ahead of the winter wheat cropping season to ensure that set targets are achieved. National monitoring and evaluation teams comprising financers like the CBZ Agro Yields and agricultural experts last week embarked on a fact-finding mission in the province. Mashonaland Central had 34 000 hectares out of 78 700 hectares under the Command Agriculture Programme. CBZ Agro-Yields managing director Walter Chigodora said failure to prepare the other 44 700 hectares was attributed to poorly-structured loan agreements, a cumbersome contract approval process that discouraged uptake of the scheme, and late disbursement of inputs. “The extension workers have the task to start collecting farmers’ details today and on the 15th we must then engage for the inception phase,” Chigodora said. Agritex acting director Stansilous Tapererwa said he was optimistic that the country would achieve higher yields compared to last year despite falling short of the set targets. “Some of the farmers were contracted late and they couldn’t reach the target in time, but these are the challenges we are ironing out going into the winter wheat season,” he said. Mashonaland Central Provincial Affairs minister Monica Mavhunga said she was hopeful of a smooth transition into the winter cropping season after surpassing the Pfumvudza targets. “We did well in the Pfumvudza programme and private contractors are hoping that combined harvesters will be availed on time so that we do not lose track of the winter farming season. At the same time, we want all stakeholders to engage so as to share their expertise,” she said. The province surpassed its Pfumvudza target of 26 400 hectares. It reached 31 658 hectares. Land tilled by private contractors, whose set target was 100 800 hectares, shot up to 177 855 hectares, a major boost to the province’s agro-based economy.