Zimbabwe has a population of just under 15 million people with a median age of 18.7 years. In a country with such a low average age, it’s no surprise that internet trends are spiking upwards with an increasing amount of users coming online as each year passes. Around 5 million people are now connected to the web in the East African nation — up almost half a million from 2019. With a third of the country now experiencing the opportunities that are made possible by being connected to the global economy beyond their borders, it’s hardly surprising that Zimbabwe is beginning to experience a boost in online sales. It’s been a difficult time for the local economy over the last 30 years, but finally things are starting to look up. Let’s take a look at some of the key moments.  Up until 2008, it’s fair to say that the economy was in a downward spiral with unemployment at 80% and inflation reaching 79,600,000,000%. But, things began to improve slightly when a multi-currency system was adopted the following year and the original currency was abandoned. Subsequent growth in the mining, agricultural, and services industries led to a rise in GDP of 20.1% two years later, which has naturally moderated to around 2.6% over the last five years. During the last couple of years, the government has embarked on a path of ambitious economic reforms to make international business easier and allow foreign investment. These policies have seen new businesses emerge and the online marketplace develop alongside them. With an increase in e-commerce activity, Zimbabwe has also seen proportional growth in areas such as online gambling. Gambling is legal in Zimbabwe, and for the last few years it has mainly been land-based casinos and betting shops that have accommodated the majority of local customers. As many of the neighboring countries have started to experience a rise in online activity, Zimbabwe has begun to follow suit. As it has taken longer for Zimbabwe to get connected to the internet, compared to countries like the United States, the online gamling industry has been left unregulated so far. That’s not to say that things won’t change in the near future but for now players are advised to be cautious when choosing a gaming provider. Many customers find sites such as those on www.casinosnotongamstop.xyz are a safer bet to ensure that they are getting the most secure experience. With other countries providing assurances for the online casinos that operate in their territory, these safety guarantees can be passed on to those who use them from other parts of the world. Another good example of a website that recommends casinos that accept players from all over the world is Swedish casino guide casinoutansvensklicens.site. For a while there has been a general feeling of distrust in Zimbabwe that purchases made via the internet would actually reach their destination. With an e-commerce sector still very much in its infancy, this is a perfectly rational fear. Usually, it can take years to build consumer trust and make inroads into e-sales figures, but the current pandemic has forced the customer’s hand. Being confined to their homes during the nationwide lockdown meant that many people who could afford to do so took advantage of online shopping accounts that they may have otherwise been too skeptical to utilize. Couple this with the fact that remittance payments received from family members working abroad totalled $466.2 million USD — up a third year on year — and you start to see a clearer picture of how the sector has enjoyed a welcomed boost.