GOVERNMENT yesterday indicated that schools will reopen in two weeks’ time and that preparations were at an advanced stage. At face value, this is a welcome proposition which all and sundry should embrace, except that there are pending issues which President Emmerson Mnangagwa’s administration should resolve expeditiously for the smooth resumption of the school calendar. Among these burning issues is the impasse between government and teachers over salaries and allowances, the provision of personal protective equipment (PPE) to teachers and learners, including testing for COVID-19. If teachers’ demands are not met, we don’t see them returning to school given that the salary issue is critical to their capacitation and that COVID-19 is a matter of life and death. It is apparent that infections and fatalities had massively decelerated, but this was a result of the just removed restrictions, thus the need for adherence to the World Health Organisation (WHO) protocols. The nation is justifiably apprehensive that without religiously complying with WHO regulations and if the sloppiness of yesteryear creeps in, the country will relapse, resulting in an even more deadly third wave, which the health sector may fail to contain. The removal of restrictions before herd immunity is attained, despite being an economic imperative at this juncture, can be a cocktail for disaster which should be avoided. Massive immunisation should, therefore, take place before schools reopen. The children are our future, hence their protection from the pandemic needs not be overemphasised. It is our obligation, as the older generation, to ensure their wellbeing and government should make this a priority. As we applaud government for relaxing restrictions to facilitate the reversion to normalcy in the entire economy, which had been hard-hit by the prohibitions, the nation is cognisant of the plight of our children in a learning environment that is not WHO COVID-19 compliant. We haven’t lost sight of the fact that education is an integral part of children’s development and their future wellbeing, but this can only be realised if children are not imperilled by the actions of those responsible for their safety. So we exhort the government to make the wellbeing of schoolchildren top priority. Actually, it is government’s obligation to do so, but we think it needs reminding because we cannot forget so easily. A mission school in Matabeleland North, John Tallach, and many others in the country closed prematurely last year after they were hit by COVID-19 infections because of government’s bungling in the provision of PPE and testing the children before they returned to school. We certainly don’t want a repeat of such reprehensive dereliction of duty by a government that is notorious for making haphazard decisions. The future of our children should not be left to whims of disinterested officials, hence authorities should adopt a holistic approach in dealing with endemic disenchantment in the governance system, otherwise the ground lost by schoolchildren will never be recouped. Some may argue that e-learning is doing wonders in the education sector, the question is: how are children in most rural areas included in this exercise in the absence of connectivity? E-learning is a preserve for the elite who afford smartphones and data bundles which are beyond the reach of many even those in urban centres. For e-learning to be ubiquitous, huge investments need to be made in internet infrastructure and smartphone availability, which is a pie in the sky for an economy afflicted by myriad of challenges, hence our salvation in the education sector lies in complying with WHO protocols and inoculation of the entire population.