BY KIMBERLY KARIATI RISING hip-hop artiste Destiny “Badman” Takunda Savanhu has said arts promoters must assist unheralded artistes and provide platforms to showcase their talents to the world. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style, Badman said apart from arts promoters, communities should also come up with strategies where those aspiring to do arts could be supported. “I believe that talent comes from rare places, so arts promoters should be willing to nurture young and fresh talent into superstars so that they can reach their goals,” he said. The Kambuzuma-bred singer said he discovered his passion for music in 2012 when he was at Kurai Primary School in his neighbourhood. “My first recording was for a song called Jesu Ave Kuuya at Sound City records. I was in Grade 6. I have recorded 13 songs and among those I featured on my medley song titled Thank You Mama are my mentor Tenderoyashe Maturure popularly known as T Wayne. He is my biggest cheerleader as he kept encouraging me until I got a singles collection in 2017,” he said. “When my music journey began, I got support from my uncle Prosper Mutanha who worked so hard in arranging shows and radio interviews for me.” As a young man aspiring to do wonders in the music industry, Badman resorted to street performances to quench his thirst for recognition and acknowledgement which made him popular with Kambuzuma residents. “After recording a couple of songs, I had so much energy such that I started performing at roadshows and crusades, and people started listening to my music. As of now, I have many fans that support my music in my hood,” he said. “The year 2018 is one to remember as I recorded a song called Rufu which touched the hearts of many. The song is about how sudden death can be and many relate to it. I have been amazed by the response I got across generations.” Badman said his dream was to rule the showbiz scene with his music dominating airwaves, adding that he would be releasing his debut album titled My Life on a yet to be announced date.