BY WINSTONE ANTONIO THE COVID-19 pandemic may have been devastating, but for gospel singer Tafadzwa Mukaro, it was time to concentrate on composing music and tomorrow, she pulls out one of the songs Padoko Padoko from her music bag. Mukaro last released a song in June last year when she dropped a duet with veteran gospel artiste Machanic Manyeruke titled Mweya Mutsvene, which has an accompanying video. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style ahead of tomorrow’s release, Mukaro said the latest single, that will have an accompanying video and done by Simba Gee, would come as a therapy for couples. “It has been such a difficult time to come round not being able to move around during the lock-down, but this gave me a lot of time to compose music which I will be releasing as the year goes. I am thankful of where the Lord has taken me,” she said. “I also learnt of the wide reach social media has and how it is now vital to keep in touch with our fans. During the lockdown, it was also a time to learn that family is important as we spend time which we normally do not have to also meditate on the word of God as a family and seek God’s protection.” Mukaro said the single explored love and how people should stand by each other in good and bad times. “The song talks about how enduring love should be in bad times and the importance of working hard and remaining faithful to receive the blessings of God. The Lord always has amazing plans for us if we remain faithful in love,” she said. Mukaro said the song emphasised that couples should always be faithful to each other so that they receive favour from the Lord and that they should protect each other as partners. “People’s focus as couples has changed. They want to start off with everything in order, but you build up from somewhere and grow together in love to buy a home, a car and live comfortably,” she said. “This song encourages couples to support each other. Couples should not let their better halves struggle alone. They would rather face the challenges together.” Mukaro said it took her more than a year to record the song due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which restricted her movement between home and the studio. “We had planned to release an album last year, but we ended up releasing a single called Mweya Mutsvene, which featured Baba Manyeruke. We partly recorded the song Padoko Padoko in 2020 and we managed to complete the single this year,” she said. “The song was recorded by John Kwesha and mixed and mastered by MacDonald “Macdee”Chidavaenzi.” Mukaro said she was pleased that she was settling well in the music industry, adding that it had been a great journey of self-discovery and growth for which she is thankful to God. “I continue to strive to grow in music and also spiritually as a Christian. I have big dreams and I thank the Almighty as he keeps revitalising my energy towards my calling to minister the word of God through music. I am thankful of where the Lord has taken me,” she said. Mukaro is the voice behind gospel hits Makanaka, Ndashanda, Mhinduro, Kupisirira Kune Zuva, Tinomurumbidza and Munamato Unesimba.