There is no better definition of “fail”, than the one provided by the dictionary, which says: “Not to achieve a particular stated goal”. And as such, there is no other more appropriate way to describe a “failure” as, “someone who cannot achieve a particular stated goal”. Tendai Ruben Mbofana And, as can be clearly discerned from these perfectly put meanings, there is absolutely no provision for exceptional cases, or extenuating circumstances, or any other justification for this inability “to achieve a particular stated goal”. Here is a case in point: in 2013 I got a very lucrative job at a reputable organisation based in Belgravia, Harare — where I had several stated goals, and set targets, which I had to achieve within a specific performance appraisal. As much as my bosses never expressed any dissatisfaction, or disapproval of the quality of work I was producing — nonetheless, based on my own personal evaluation of my performance, as compared to the stated goals, and set targets, I believed that I was falling short on several fronts, and as such, I decided it was not proper for me to continue on the job. In spite of the fact that there were several justifiable reasons for this inability — which, I honestly felt were beyond my control — my conscience, nevertheless, could not allow me to be paid for something I was not doing satisfactorily, and failing to deliver on all deliverables. In fact, corruption and theft are not merely limited to the commonly accepted definitions, such as taking or offering bribes, or fraudulently benefiting from something, or taking someone else’s property without their consent, but also includes accepting payment for a job not perfectly and satisfactorily done, and even remaining in a position where one is not adequately fulfilling stated goals. Therefore, as much as this was going to result in some grave financial challenges for my family, I resigned from the organisation — which, amazingly filled me with a profound sense of peace, as my conscience was clear. Additionally, I honestly believed that in doing the honest and faithful thing in the eyes of God, He would open new opportunities for me, which He did. To me, that is how everyone in a position of responsibility should treat their jobs. As such, anyone who fails to achieve all specified goals does not deserve to remain in office — regardless of the reasons, even the most understandable. Let us then move to the situation we are facing in Zimbabwe whereby the vast majority of the citizens has had to endure untold suffering, poverty, and injustice at the hands of government. Indeed, in the past few days I have covered this issue, but I appeared to only be targeting the Zanu PF-led government. However, MDC-administered local authorities cannot be spared as they are similarly to blame for the dismal, pathetic, and shoddy service delivery the people of Zimbabwe have been subjected to for two decades. Whether these are potholed and dangerous roads, lack of safe, clean, and potable water, or streetlights — the blame squarely lies with these local government councils, and no one else. There can never be an excuse for inability to achieve stated goals, and both the ruling Zanu PF and opposition MDCs, have horrendously failed to fulfil their election promises. Zanu PF promised to improve the economy from the ousted late former President Robert Mugabe era, where the cost of a loaf of bread was 90 cents a loaf, the creation of jobs under the “Zimbabwe is open for business” mantra, the building of
400 000 houses in the first eight months of Emmerson Mnangagwa’s coming into power through a military coup d’etat in November 2017 and a subsequent 1,5 million more housing units between 2018 and 2023, at a rate of 300 000 a year, or 25 000 a month, or 6 250 per week, or 892 a day, as well as opening up of democratic space, with genuine media, political, and electoral reforms. MDC Alliance promised to improve service delivery in the urban areas including consistent and reliable water supply, refuse collection, repair of local roads, and so many other pledges. Honestly, if we are to mark these two main political players’ performances, would it not be true that none of them deserve anything higher than a “U” (if they were O-Levels), or an “F” (if they were A-Levels), as they have not managed to fulfil even one hundredth of what they promised the electorate. What I even find more laughable is the ruling Zanu PF’s attempt at convincing the voters that they can do a better job than the MDC if they took over urban councils. Are these people for real? They have made an embarrassingly huge mess in running Zimbabwe — turning a once proud and prosperous country into a basket case. So, how in the world do they expect to successfully run towns and cities? The facts are there for all to see. Both political parties have shamelessly failed, and there is no excuse for failure since the mandate of anyone entrusted with leadership is to overcome any challenges and obstacles they may face, and achieve all stated goals without fail. The MDC has no moral ground to stand on by blaming the ruinous manner in which the Zanu PF central government has mismanaged the country’s economy, neither can the ruling party point a finger at Western-imposed sanctions, nor distractors, nor the COVID-19 pandemic. What are the ever-suffering people of Zimbabwe to do? Where is their hope? Well, as one of the founding principles of the Constitution aptly states that the authority to govern is derived from the people — as such, we all now need to stand up and reclaim that authority as a united force (irrespective of one’s political affiliation) against this wanton disregard of our constitutional and civil rights. We need to boldly and relentlessly face those in power — both at local and national government levels by exercising our constitutionally-enshrined rights to expression, opinion, peaceful demonstrations, and petitioning them to immediately step up or step out. There is absolutely no room for political games as we appear constantly embroiled in meaningless power struggles that have absolutely nothing to do with our bread and butter issues. We now need to focus on our own needs as the people of Zimbabwe. The more we allow ourselves to be distracted by all these “ED Pfee”, “Chamisa Chete Chete”, “Mwonzora this and that” nonsense, the more we find ourselves deeper in the abyss of despair, poverty, and suffering. Yet, we have the power to change the course of this country and our destiny by standing up together without regard to political persuasion. Have we forgotten how we made things happen in the 1980s amd 1990s whereby we resoundingly and successfully stood up against mealie-meal price increases, or the Aids levy, and other causes and the government listened due to our phenomenal power in unity, bravery and numbers? Why can we not re-ignite that power and flame again? There is not reason at all except if we allow ourselves to continue on this path of polarisation and let politicians — with vested interests, and power, privilege, and popularity objectives, to use us as pawns — yet, we have our own goals as citizens that we need to concentrate on. There is no room for excuses and we now need to loudly and unequivocally stamp our authority, put our feet down and demand what we deserve as a nation. If we do that, none of those in office today would stay one day longer. If we do not this, then we do not have any cause to complain whatsoever and should just shut up, and let those in power continue doing whatever they please.