Instagram is certainly a social media giant at present. Founded in 2010, it has managed to solidify its place at the top of the list of social media platforms. More than a billion active users are committed to Instagram for one purpose or another. Some merely use it for entertainment but it serves way more purposes for many others. Marketing is one of them and many brands prefer Instagram over other platforms for this purpose. You can also use Instagram to promote your website and here is how. The bio of an account exists to tell everything about the user in a few words. It can include the name, occupation, or the purpose of the account. This bio can also be used for guiding traffic towards your website. All you need to do is put a link to your website along with a small description. It will be one of the very first things a visitor would see. With the right description, you can interest the user enough to check your website out. You can also keep on adding different links to it as Instagram doesn’t allow clickable links in posts. Movie teasers exist to give the viewers a sneak peek of what is about to come. It keeps them interested and invested in the idea for when it arrives. You can do the same for your content and product on Instagram. You can post images and videos of what you offer on your website. It can be the next bag you’re launching or the next article that you’re writing. In their captions, you can encourage your followers to check the other stuff on your website through the link in your bio.  Instagram offers all of its users its own advertisement service for budget-friendly amounts. The reach and customizability of these ads make them a great option if you want to get . Probably the best thing about these ads is that they allow you to put clickable links in them. You also get different options like photos, videos, and carousels there. They make it possible for multiple products to be showcased at once. Investing in Instagram ads pretty much confirms a huge boost in your website traffic. Instagram influencers are common men who rose to celebrity status on the internet. Their prominence has only grown over the past few years and probably will keep growing. The name is given to them due to their capabilities of influencing their fanbase’s choices. It can be related to shopping or following another Instagrammer. This is why it is a great idea to take the help of one such influencer. Without spending much, you can make them promote your account and your website. This will direct their own audience and more to your website. Not only your website traffic gets boosted but it will also help you gain a wider reach on Instagram. Stories by Instagram are temporary posts that disappear after a duration of 24 hours. You can use stories and many available stickers to increase your audience’s interest in your website’s content. One such sticker is a countdown which can be used for promoting an upcoming project. Another great option is posting clickable links in stories. There is an option to add links to stories along with text or visual media. Doing so will present a “see more” option which directly leads to the link you have pasted. However, there is a catch here. This option is only available for accounts that have over 10k followers. If you do not have that already, there are some websites that can help you. These websites let you buy Instagram followers for considerable prices. The best options to buy Instagram followers from include Venium, GetRealBoost, Viralyft, and Famoid.  Instagram TV, often shortened to IGTV, is a convenient feature that lets you post full-length videos. They are just like YouTube videos and have a description like them too. In these descriptions, you can post clickable links to any website that you want. If you don’t have many followers and don’t want to buy Instagram followers either, using IGTV descriptions is the perfect alternative. Highlights are like a permanent version of Stories. They appear on the top of your timeline and do not disappear after 24 hours as Stories do. In highlights, you can post multiple photos and videos of what you have to offer. You can also lead your followers to your website by asking them to check the link in the bio. Even better, you can put a custom name to all your Highlights collections. Having one named after your website or something related to it will surely draw the attention of a visitor. Instagram is an amazingly convenient platform for any kind of advertising. There is no surprise that it is the top choice of most of the brands for online marketing. It has shown statistically better results than other available options in countless surveys and studies. Just like it has done for thousands already, it can work wonders for your website and your product. All you have to do is make solid content and implement the 7 strategies mentioned here.