PRIVATE vehicles have increased their fares to around US$1,50 from around US$1 for two people. Zupco no longer goes to residential areas such as Sunningdale, Southerton, Mbare and many more. A commuter has to wait for a Zupco bus for more than two hours before they are ferried to and from the central business district. At most, the commuters start queuing at around 3pm, but only manage to get a Zupco bus at around 6pm, depending on availability of bus for their routes on that day. There is no fixed schedule of Zupco bus movements, thus instead of the sole transporter being a blessing, it has become a nightmare for people. Commuter omnibuses on the Zupco franchise charge double the fare of the conventional Zupco buses. Commuters from Kuwadzana, Kuwadzana Extension and Dzivaresekwa Extension are not allowed a ride on the Zupco buses if they do not have tap cards. These tap cards are only bought in the central business district and not anywhere in the suburbs where the people live. For one to buy a tap card, they should pay US$1, then they top up in order to board the buses. Commuters have also expressed concern over the refusal by Zupco crews to allow one person to pay for another. For example, a wife cannot pay for her husband using her tap card. Instead, Zupco conductors, drivers and inspectors have dozens of their own tap cards. They use them to pay for commuters, however, at more than the gazetted Zupco fare. For example, where it costs $30, they charge $50 using their own tap cards. What this means is that Zupco has allowed tap card cartels, where their conductors, drivers and inspectors are making a killing through abusing the Zupco facility. Eventually, the Zupco transport system will collapse due to these widespread financial leakages. On Zupco kombis, there is no social distancing, no sanitising and there is very little compliance on wearing of face masks. However, on Zupco conventional buses, they are strict on adhering to COVID-19 regulations. Harare Residents Trust