BY Tawanda Tafirenyika Premier Soccer League giants Caps United have lost another player after goalkeeper Wallace Magalane  completed his move to FC Platinum.
Magalane left FC Platinum for Caps United early last year and has returned to his old club without kicking a ball for the Green Machine after the 2020 season was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Caps signed several players both on loan and permanent basis, but some of them have left without getting to pull on the famous green shirt. Ian Nyoni was signed on a loaned deal from Chapungu, but the player has been hunting for greener pastures after he was involved in a failed trial stint at Tanzania’s Simba SC. Innocent Mucheneka, who had signed a year’s contract with Caps was also trying to force through a move to FC Platinum. Caps were seemingly reluctant to release Magalane insisting that he was part of coach Darlington Dodo’s plans, but they finally gave in following FC Platinum persistence. Yesterday the platinum miners’ spokesperson Chido Chizondo confirmed that Magalane had signed a two-year deal at the champions, who will be back in the Caf Champions League this August after another failed flirtation in the current edition. The miners are looking to strengthen their squad for the continental competition after their feeble assault in the continent’s premier club competition this year where they failed to reach the group stages, losing out to Simba SC, before they were bundled out of the Confederation Cup. “We agreed terms with Caps United and Magalane has transferred to FC Platinum on a two-year permanent deal,” Chizondo said. Caps United boss Nhamo Tutisani also confirmed the deal, adding that they had agreed to let Magalane rejoin FC Platinum due to their participation in continental competitions. “As you might be aware negotiations have been ongoing and we agreed to let him go. We thought it was important to help them (FC Platinum) in their quest for the Confederation Cup, but unfortunately they were knocked out.” Tutisani earlier said that Dodo was happy with the players that he has at his disposal, adding that those that have left were not in the coach’s plans. Caps United like other Premier League teams are waiting on government to give the greenlight for the resumption of football after Zifa applied for permission.