Everyone who has at least some previous betting experience knows that gambling websites do not want to develop their own games. Besides the fact this costs a lot of money, most players are already used to certain types of games because they have been around for many years. As a result, casinos decided to shake hands with a few various software providers. That’s why we want to show you which are some of the top casino software suppliers that you should look for when choosing an online casino. There weren’t that many software developers back in the days, but now, there are all sorts of companies that create casino games, so it’s essential to know the ones that stand out. Pragmatic Play The first operator that we want to include on this list can be found on many websites. In fact, you can look at Svenplay, which is one of the biggest names in the business, and you will see that Pragmatic Play created some of the games that you will have access to. This provider has been a part of the iGaming industry since 2015, and since then, it has made a name for itself for offering some of the best Megaways in the world. What’s interesting is that Pragmatic Play also hosts special tournaments that allow bettors to compete for a life-changing cash prize. If you open an account on a casino that works with this software provider, make sure you check the tournament section. Microgaming According to this company’s official site, Microgaming created the world’s first online casino software in 1994. This means that this brand has been a part of the online gambling business for more than 27 years. There are many world-class titles created by this operator that you probably play on a daily basis, such as Book of Oz, Immortal Romance, and so on.  Evolution Gaming One of the things that make some online casinos better than others is the live betting section. Nowadays, most brands work with different live casino providers, most of which are pretty good. Yet, one of them definitely stands out, and that’s Evolution Gaming. This is the brand behind some of the most popular games with live dealers in the world. Although most people know it for its distinct blackjack, baccarat, and roulette tables, EG is also famous for its numerous game shows, such as Monopoly Live, Crazy Time, Deal or No Deal, and so on. Yggdrasil The last company on this list is known for its innovations, which is one of the main reasons why people love it. Although Yggdrasil does not have as many years of experience as other brands on this list, it has proven that its games live up to the expectations of even the pickiest customers. Conclusion As we’ve mentioned earlier in this article, we can’t cover every software provider because there are just too many of them. Numerous other companies deserve attention, such as NetEnt, Betsoft, Push Gaming, and more, so check them out.