JOHANNESBURG, SOUTH AFRICA | Fastjet is pleased to announce, effective from Wednesday 03 March 2021, the introduction of new travel flexibility options under the “Flexi-Go” banner, which will apply on all fare types across its domestic and international network. The introduction of this new product offering reaffirms the value airline’s commitment to all customers in providing more flexibility when managing their travel plans by facilitating changes at short notice for customers who arrive early or are unable to make their flight. Under the “Flexi-Go” banner, customers are now offered three product options, this includes “GoEarlier”, “GoLater” & “GoFirm” change options. The “GoEarlier” option offers customers with the opportunity on the day of travel to change their booking to a preceding flight. Complimenting the “GoEarlier” offering, the multi-award-winning airline has added the “GoLater” option, which affords all customers a unique benefit to travel on a subsequent later flight up to three (3) days from the original flight date. The third option, “GoFirm” introducing a No-Show policy extends greater flexibility to rebook a missed flight to any date in the future on a confirmed seat basis. Customers who arrive at the airport in time for an earlier flight may take advantage of the new “GoEarlier” benefits. This subject to space offer, will require customers to register their interest at fastjet airport ticket desk. The airline will then list the customer for the alternate flight and just before the check in process finalises, if a seat is available, the customer will be checked in and will be off on their travels, arriving at their destination earlier. The same offer and process applies for those customers that arrive late and miss their flight, whereby they can register for the “Go Later” option, valid for up to three (3) days from the original date of travel. These exclusive new on the day value options are subject to space and will only be supported on the day of travel at the departure airport for a nominal change fees of USD $15 to travel earlier and USD $25 to travel on a later flight. As part of their launch offer, fastjet will be waiving these fees until 30 June 2021. The No Show policy “GoFirm” offer extends greater flexibility to rebook a missed flight to any date in the future on a confirmed seat basis. The once-off rebooking opportunity is available via a fastjetshop or Call Centre for a fee of USD $40, up to 72 hours from the original travel date. A fastjet spokesperson shared, “We are always exploring new ways of extending value and flexibility to our passengers. The Flexi-Go product, with its three options, is aimed at providing our passengers with total flexibility. Customers can choose to travel on a preceding flight on the same route they are booked on, this is suitable for customers who arrive early at the airport and for customers who would have missed their flights, we now offer an innovative new opportunity to travel later on the same route”.