By Cyprian Muketiwa Ndawana YOUR Excellency, President ED Mnangagwa. Recent tours by government officials to houses ruined by floods in Harare called for solemnity. Essentially, these visits required that the ministers and their entourages be as what Jesus implored: “shrewd as a serpent, and innocent as a dove.” I think these tours were, by no means, campaign trails or rallies. There were solely for consoling families in their dire hour. Every delegate had to be sufficiently endowed with requisite capacity to vicariously hurt the feelings of those affected. These were assignments to empathise with communities whose homes were destroyed by floods. Hence, the mission was supposed to be absolutely solemn. It was supposed to be undertaken by people endowed with human kindness, who embrace the humility of servant leadership. Yet, it was not to be as delegates puffed away their self-rightousness. Like the friends of Job, they were unremitting, pestering city fathers with uncomplimentary remarks. They accused council of corruption, poor service delivery and every other imaginable social ill. As I see it, the tours were the least appropriate occasions for splattering mud and throwing debris at political opponents. With all due respect, it was mere cheap politicking to singularly blame the plight of citizenry settled on wetlands on opposition-run local authorities. After the tours, the national broadcaster embarked on a countrywide crusade to highlight poor service delivery by local authorities. Each news bulletin, predictably, featured residents condemning councils for service delivery failures. Your Excellency, it could not have been coincidental that the visits by ministers were paid on the backdrop of your pledge to clean up corruption in local authorities. I think that the cheap politics evident in the subsequent disparagement of councils was demeaning, if not vainglorious. It is saddening that Harare City Council is now basically dysfunctional due to a series of arrests of top officials following orders from your goons in central government. What a melee it turned out to be as the mayoral chain was passed on in unprecedented quick succession. Granted, a return to normalcy will take many moons. Added to the debacle at Town House were the recalls of councillors from the chamber owing to rivalries among Movement for Democratic Change factions. As I see it, government’s determination to weaken the opposition constitutes material for another article. It suffices for now to underscore that even a recent arrival from Mars can tell which of the two factions government detests with apparent abhorrence. With almost every senior leader of that faction facing charges of all sorts, the odour of cheap politicking is, indeed, distinct. It is below the dignity of even a village head to extol oneself as a benevolent saviour of the affected citizenry. Actually, relocations are a herculean task that requires forethought and planning. Consequently, it is a promise that ought not to have been made as an appeasement. Your Excellency, it was blatant callous indifference to the plight of the affected citizenry for government to seize their plight as an opportunity to gain political mileage. Blaming councils for the ruination of homes in the aftermath of the recent heavy downpours was inhumane. Furthermore, promises for relocation at a time the victims of flooding were grappling with the reality of their fate was devoid of sincerity. Apparently, government showed a complete lack of probity by hastily denouncing councils and hitting them below the belt. Your Excellency, floods were only but a harbinger of disasters waiting to happen. I think accusing opposition-led councils is no panacea, so are impromptu relocation promises. These strategies are indeed futile and devoid of sensibility. Fears of outbreaks of cholera and dysentery are fast becoming nightmares. What increased the likelihood of disease outbreaks is that a considerable number of people is living in squalor, with no provisions for sewer, water and refuse collection. Vast tracts of land were arbitrarily parcelled out for residential stands in Harare, Ruwa and Chitungwiza. No one knows the number of families in these sprawling settlements. It is difficult to imagine how they are coping with no basics for urban habitation. Yet, it has become the standard operating procedure for government to blame anything and everything on all and sundry, except itself. Not until donkeys grow horns, it will not take responsibility. But, there are limits to everything. The plight of citizenry settled on undesignated residential areas is a social challenge that requires seriousness. Actually, housing is a fundamental human right. It demands frank deliberations. Its provision has no room for cheap politics. Your Excellency, your failure to fulfil the promise not only to name and shame, but to prosecute land barons is tantamount to dereliction of duty. I think government has been complicit, while citizenry were being settled on undesignated areas. These settlements are havens for all sorts of poverty-induced vices. Also, they are prone to airborne and waterborne diseases. It is irksome that 40 years into independence, citizens are living in dwellings that are a far cry of descent basic housing. Although there are some which are strikingly impressive, their stunning beauty is diminished by the fact that they were built on undesignated land. Also, their surroundings are so haphazard that the law of averages reduces their appeal and value to that of a shack. Areas such as Southlea Park, East View and Solomio, to mention but a few, are a danger for human habitation. Yet, it is a public secret that the allocations were done by land barons known to be Zanu PF cadres. Amid the Presidential inaction on the promise to bring land barons to book, it is nauseating that government has the audacity to denounce local authorities. What is particularly bothersome is that it seems oblivious of the rot prevalent at national institutions. While government has gone into full gear to disparage local authorities for sloppy service delivery and corruption, it is apparent that national institutions are not faring better than councils. Also, national institutions are by and large in dire dereliction. Your Excellency, our public healthcare service delivery, as well as the infrastructure, are no longer tenable in this day and age. With the health personnel frustrated over remuneration and poor working environment, our hospitals are no longer serving the purpose. There is no national public institution that has preserved it former sparkle. Name them one by one, the common thread of rot and ruination runs through them. With some of our State universities now issuing fraudulent degrees, all institutions lost the essence of national pride. Basically, government has no moral obligation to merchandise itself in favourable livery. It is by no means smarter than the councils. After all, fish smells from the head. One thing Zimbabwe urgently needs is a winsome strategy to reverse the ongoing national tragedy. His Excellency, history has no blank pages. As I see it, your cheap politics of deferring to act on land barons, coupled with the injudicious appointment to Cabinet of a corruption convict, corruption is destined to continue pestering not only the economy, but your legacy as well.