LONDON — The Red Devils midfielder admits Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s side need to start taking a few risks in order to rediscover their spark in the final third Nemanja Matic is looking for Manchester United to start taking a few risks in their bid to end a barren run in front of goal that has now reached 285 minutes. Three full games have come and gone since the Red Devils last found the target, with nobody in Solskjaer’s squad troubling the scorers since Bruno Fernandes converted a 75th-minute penalty at Newcastle on February 21. What has been said? Matic told United’s official website following the stalemate at Selhurst Park: “It’s hard to explain, but I think that we have to do much better in these sorts of games, especially to create more opportunities, to risk more in their half, around their box. “Crystal Palace were very solid at the back. Their midfield dropped in a bit so it was very difficult to break through. We have to give credit to them, but we know what we have to do. We need to do better in attack. We know these are games we have to win.” Next up for Manchester United The next opportunity for the Red Devils to get back on the goal trail will see them take on arch-rivals Manchester City. Solskjaer’s men are due at Etihad Stadium on Sunday for a contest that presents them with a chance to end the Citizens’ 21-game winning run in all competitions. United have their own 21-game sequence to preserve, having gone that many matches unbeaten away from home, and have picked up nine clean sheets on their travels this season in all competitions. Matic added: “I think we defended well as a team, all 11 players. We need to take some positives; we didn’t concede a goal, we got a point “During the season, there are periods where you score lots of goals, and you have some periods where you concede some goals, but you need to break that barrier in the next game, if it is
possible. “We have to be focused for the next game because everyone knows we have Manchester City to play. [It’s a] big game and big challenge for us and we want to get three points to see where we are.” — Goal