The near future will be more open to cryptocurrencies and people will support digital money. The year 2020 has been very difficult for almost everyone. Most of the cities were blocked and shopping malls were shut down all around the world. Spread all around the world in every corner, was an air of depression. A lot of people lost their jobs and a lot of people had to be quarantined. The pandemic has impacted our lives in ways we never could have imagined. People had to start looking for alternatives when there were no jobs. A lot of people were also forced to work from their homes. However, it has been said that the pandemic played the role of a catalyst for the industry of bitcoin. Lockdowns were imposed in almost every country and when people had nothing to do, they entered the crypto world and started educating themselves on bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. Analysts say that a lot of people entered the crypto world after the pandemic had started.  China’s Digital Yuan. Recently, China has been seen to start a shift towards a digital future of money that would be cashless. However, this does not mean that China has started accepting bitcoin or other digital currencies. Instead, China is going to come up with a digital currency of their own. Unlike bitcoin, this digital currency will most likely be controlled by the central bank. Bitcoin’s biggest advantage or the attraction is that it is a decentralized currency. China’s own digital currency could prove to be a challenge for cryptocurrencies like bitcoin in 2021. The main reason for the creation of the digital yuan was because there was no intervention by the governments on bitcoin transactions. High Price of Bitcoin. Bitcoin has evolved over the years and has provided us with enough reasons to believe in it. The year 2020 was hard on every industry. However, if we look at the statistics at the end of 2020, bitcoin’s price has only gone higher. This is good news for the traders and the investors. Bitcoin has gained a lot of value. The bitcoin market capitalization exceeded and broke the previous records. Bitcoin is predicted to rise in value in 2021 and will provide traders and investors with better opportunities. A lot of traders had also started using trading bots and automated trading platforms, like the Bitcoin Pro robot, who execute trades on behalf of the users. With the help of these trading bots, people do not need to sit in front of their computer screens and wait for the right opportunity. These trading bots are powered by Artificial Intelligence (AI) and consider multiple factors in order to trade profitably. More people are looking to enter the crypto market and make profits through trading. The number of traders will most likely increase in 2021. Selling pressure and Adoption of Bitcoin. It is predicted that the selling pressure, in order to cut losses, will drop in 2021. Traders and investors have seen the rise in the value of bitcoin during the pandemic. Most bitcoin holders will have to register on an exchange platform if they are looking to sell their cryptocurrency. If the activity on such exchange platforms decreases, it is telling us that there is little or no selling pressure on the market. The investors who own bitcoin as assets will refrain from selling them. Many people have said that bitcoin could replace fiat money in the near future. In the future, more people will want to use these digital currencies and this is also the main reason that bitcoin, the first and the most popular cryptocurrency, will have greater adoption in 2021. With enough support from millennials, adoption of bitcoin can be made easy through bitcoin trading and bitcoin payment systems. It is important to note that PayPal now accepts cryptocurrencies like bitcoin for financial transactions. PayPal has said that users can buy products and services through these digital currencies. With time, PayPal would allow more buying options to help people around the world. It is predicted that bitcoin will only grow and will attract more traders and investors. Digital currencies could even replace gold as a hedge against inflation and there will be more debates and headlines about bitcoin. The future is predicted to be more about digitizing money. 