BY PRAISEMORE SITHOLE THE opposition Zapu party has criticised government for lack of vision to curtail the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic which is ravaging the country. Zapu presidential spokesperson Mkhululi Zulu yesterday criticised government for COVID-19 corruption where some top officials were accused of abusing funds meant for the procurement of goods and services used in the prevention of the spread of the virus, as well as its failure to cushion the vulnerable groups during the lockdown period. His statement came as the Health and Child Care ministry’s COVID-19 statistics showed that recorded cases had reached 27 203 and 713 deaths as of Monday.
Bulawayo, which is one of the COVID-19 hotspots, recorded 4 329 cumulative cases and 150 deaths on Monday. “The initial scientific approach by the government gave hope to the people despite reports of funds falling on the hands of corrupt government officials including the former Health minister, Obadiah Moyo who was subsequently dismissed,” Zulu said in an interview with Southern Eye. “Every logical move to stop the spread of the coronavirus must be supported vigorously. “However, it is baffling and indeed confusing when the government comes up with measures whose impacts on the daily lives of the people end up being as painful as the virus itself. “The measures were just taken abruptly without balancing the control of preventing the spread of the virus and the economic needs and realities of citizens. People must eliminate the spread of the virus, but they must live because life must continue,” he said. Zulu said the 30-day COVID-19 lockdown period had unfortunately brought to a halt over 90% of the country’s economic activities, which is clear evidence of a decision which was made impulsively, and which he described as “entrenched in dictatorial tendencies.” “It is not easy to comprehend the threats of COVID-19 when one is hungry. People are struggling to survive on a daily basis, and how will companies that have been shut down for the whole month be able to pay workers’ monthly salaries? Workers are the breadwinners for the family and they are now incapacitated. “Many people are struggling to put food on the table. It will be worse after these 30 days of economic inactivity,” he said. Zulu said the situation was worsened by the fact that the people, especially those in Bulawayo were ignoring COVID-19 lockdown regulations in order to look for means of survival as their families have nothing to eat. He said a government with a vision would have taken steps to support its vulnerable population during the lockdown period. “We have read that other governments have put aside millions of dollars to support companies and vulnerable people during their COVID-19 lockdown periods. The threats posed by COVID-19 are being overtaken by anxieties as people go out in search for food. Employers are now spending sleepless nights pondering over how they will pay their workers,” he said.