BY MIRIAM MANGWAYA THOUSANDS of people across the globe lose lives to natural disasters every year. Ranked the 10th most deadly disaster, the 2004 quake in Indonesia created a massive tsunami that killed approximately 230 000, and displaced nearly two million people in 14 South Asian and East African countries. The Haiti earthquake of 2010 saw 316 000 dead and closer to home, there is Cyclone Idai, which claimed lives of 240 people and left thousands homeless and facing starvation. But in December 2019, a more cruel disaster, coronavirus (COVID-19) emerged. The virus, which originated in Wuhan, China, has surpassed several other disasters in its level of life destruction. The virus has claimed lives of more than 1,8 million people in less than 14 months around the globe, according to the World Health Organisation. The cunning beast, as scientist would want to describe it, does not know any race, social class or status or gender boundaries. In the midst of the raging pandemic, the United States President Donald Trump last year described himself as a “war-time president,” who was fighting an invisible enemy. Sadly, in 2020 alone, the world has been robbed of its finest musicians, soccer stars, leaders and celebrities from all walks of life, by the novel virus. Some public figures like Trump and his wife Melania, France president Emmanuel Macron, UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson and Prince Charles, heir to the British throne, were lucky enough to recover from the virus. On Saturday, Zimbabwe woke up to shattering news of the death of prominent businessman, Thompson Dondo, director of Impala car rental company, who succumbed to COVID-19. The late former minister Nathan Shamuyarira’s wife Dorothy also died due to the coronavirus. Lobels Bakeries managing director Heritage Mudiwa Nhende also succumbed to the virus. The three deaths came two days after the virus claimed the life of Worthwhile Mugabe, a Bulawayo-based businessman. Following Mugabe’s death, Masimba Tawenga, who was Zanu PF UK district chairman and also an intern in the Commissariat Department at the party headquarters died of the disease. Local politicians including Thokozani Khupe, Richard Moyo, Elias Mudzuri, and Larry Mavhima among others have been brave enough to publicly declare that they had tested positive of COVID-19. Journalist Zororo Makamba was the country’s first coronavirus casualty in March 2020 and it shocked Zimbabwe, for he had only battled the disease for three days. Makamba, a well-connected journalist, who also came from a wealthy and high-profile family, was not, however, saved by his social status. His death exposed the inadequacies of the country’s health institutions in dealing with the pandemic as he, according to family members, died asking for better medical attention. Early December, Zimbabwe lost another journalist, Janet Munyaka (48), who was the ZBC diplomatic correspondent, to the virus after having serving the national broadcaster for over 10 years. After having been hospitalised for less than 24 hours, Agriculture Minister Perrance Shiri’s death also shocked many Zimbabweans because his illness had not been known to many. Shiri (65), a retired general, who was popularly known for his role in Mugabe ouster, became the first Zimbabwean high-profile person to succumb to the virus. Internationally recognised Jazz legend Manu Dibango, a Cameroonian, succumbed to the virus at the age of 86. He died at a hospital in Paris, France where he had been hospitalised for the disease for a few days. The talented saxophonist, pianist, vibraphonist, and composer gained international fame with his 1972 hit song Soul Makossa. He often fused jazz and funk music with traditional sounds from his home country Cameroon. In 2009, Dibango filed a lawsuit against Michael Jackson and Rihanna, claiming they had stolen his music in Wanna Be Startin’ Something and Don’t Stop the Music, respectively. Jackson settled for an out of court agreement. In paying tribute to Dibango, whom she described as the lion of Africa, one fan Tarza, De Ruz said on Twitter, “A true musician never dies. He just stops performing live.” Dolors Sala Carrio, who was mother to Manchester City manager Pep Guardiola, is yet another public figure who died in April 2020, after contracting coronavirus, near Barcelona in Spain. Prior to his mother’s death, Guardiola had donated US$1,08 million (€1 million) to the fight against the virus, helping fund the Angel Soler Daniel Foundation and the Medical College of Barcelona, a clear indication that money cannot save lives from the coronavirus. Mid-December, Ambrose Dlamini the prime minister of Eswatini, Africa’s last absolute monarchy, died in a South African hospital. The 52-year-old leader died after having serving as prime minister for only two years. He died after battling the disease for four weeks. In another great loss from COVID-19, renowned Spanish journalist, Jose Maria Candela also died. Candella died a week after 21-year-old Spanish coach Francisco Garcia had also succumbed to the virus. This year, 2021, the world’s battle with COVID-19 continues as a more deadly second wave of the virus is already wreaking havoc, with neighbouring South Africa having gone back to level three lockdown. Zimbabwe, just like many countries around the globe suspended festive season celebrations following a surge in local transmissions of the virus. 