BY ADMIRE JAMU-MLAMBO LEGENDARY singer Jonah Moyo  has been appointed instrument instructor in the Performing and Visual Arts department at the Great Zimbabwe University (GZU) in Masvingo. Moyo, one of the remaining yesteryear musicians, launched his musical career in the late 1970s when he released his first single Devera Ngwena Zhimozhi, backed by the Devera Ngwena Jazz Band in 1979. The single sold more than 100 000 copies. Speaking to NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, Moyo said he was happy to get such recognition from the university. “It is good that the university at least saw and appreciated my efforts. I am the first person to put Masvingo province on the map musically. I had to leave Tohoyandou in South Africa and take up this post,” he said. Moyo said he was busy in the studio preparing for his forthcoming six-track Volume 42 album, which will hit the streets during the Easter Holiday. “Currently, I am in the studio recording my new album that will be out in April. I have not named the tracks as yet, but I will only do so after the album is complete,” he said. “As usual, the album will have love songs, messages from the day-to-day happenings in life and there is also a track about the coronavirus which has claimed many lives.” Moyo admits that the musical trends have changed from the days of his hit song Solo naMutsai. “These days the young ones now have their own genre, also technology and piracy have affected us as musicians. What I can only promise my fans is that Volume 42 will be a very good album, hence, it is a must-have copy at home,” he said. At the peak of his musical career, Moyo in May 1987 went on three-month tours twice to the United Kingdom, Netherlands, Ireland, Germany, Belgium and Scotland where he held more than 40 shows. Moyo claims he was the first musician to sell local music in neighbouring countries. Although Devera Ngwena Jazz Band split in 1986s, Moyo has so far managed to release more than 57 singles and 44 albums in a career that spans over four decades. The Masvingo-based singer is excited with his latest six-track album Zimba Remabwe, which carries songs such as Great Zimbabwe, Qwami Sikhulile, Kumusha Kwedu, Pedu PaGZU, Corona and Mucha featuring GZ University Crew. Some of Moyo’s hit songs include Solo naMutsai, Gremah Wepamoyo, Barbra, Ruva Remoyo Wangu, Anoshaina NemaBabie, Wangu P, Second Hand, Ndichakutiza, Chiredzi, Too Cheap and Nyakuzvida. Moyo’s current band consists of himself (lead vocals and lead guitar), Jonisai Machinya (one of the original band members, vocals), Cephus Mabara (rythym), Nathan Chikangwe (drums) and Shepherd Shungu Moyo (his first born on drums).  Follow Admire on Twitter@admireMlambo1