BY MOSES MATENGA ACTING President Kembo Mohadi has warned party-loving Zimbabweans that they risked dying from COVID-19 if they choose to disobey the lockdown measures and go merrymaking. Mohadi yesterday pleaded with citizens to be disciplined in view of the soaring COVID-19 cases. “Zimbabweans, as you said, want to enjoy themselves. You have to choose between enjoyment and death,” Mohadi said. “We have to be disciplined. When the situation doesn’t allow, there shouldn’t be any merrymaking at all.” Mohadi said there was no need for unnecessary movement during the stringent lockdown measures announced by Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga, who is also Health minister, at the weekend. Thousands of Zimbabweans chose partying over the New Year’s Eve with one of the “super-spreader” parties held in Mbare where hundreds of people were in attendance. Police has already launched a manhunt for disk jockey, DJ Fantan over the gathering. Government ministers have also been implicated in attending parties that violated lockdown  measures. Asked about the lack of ventilation beds and congestion in hospitals, Mohadi professed ignorance saying: “That is a very technical question, but what I know is we have provided enough and I don’t know about the congestion you are asking or what you have heard of. Go and verify then come and ask me a question specifically saying I have been there and saw it, let us not speculate.” “Experience has taught us that preventive measures are important in the fight against such an epidemic.” Mohadi said the country has, in the last week recorded 1 342 COVID-19 cases and 29 deaths representing the highest number of cases recorded to date. “Yesterday, 407 new cases and eight deaths were recorded and all of which were local infections. We have seen the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths double in two months from 8 374 on November, 1 2020, to 14 191 cases to date,” Mohadi said. He said Zimbabweans must adhere to measures put in place by the government. Mohadi said the government was working on plans to decongest water points, bus termini, grinding mills, supermarkets and other crowded areas. Most cities are faced with water crisis that have seen residents queuing at community boreholes to get the precious liquid and exposing themselves to the virus. “The various need to be fought by us all. Let there be a paradigm shift in behaviour. No one else shall be infected,” he said. l Follow Moses on Twitter @mmatenga 