BY FORTUNE MBELE THE Premier Soccer League (PSL) has cast doubts on the Highlanders elections taking place at the annual general meeting on February 7. PSL chief executive Kennedy Ndebele yesterday said following government pronouncements regarding gatherings in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic, the league would not escalate the matter to the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC). “We are in possession of the letter from Highlanders. But with what is happening (rise in COVID-19 cases and deaths) and the letter from the SRC regarding gatherings, we could not escalate the correspondence from Highlanders. We just forwarded the letter to Zifa for their own information. In the present situation, we will stand guided by the government and wait for reviews on the lockdown regulations,” Ndebele said. On January 11, the Bulawayo giants wrote to the PSL a letter signed by club chief executive Nhlanhla Dube. “Highlanders Football Club, an affiliate of the PSL and Zifa, being a member-owned club and regulated by its constitution, request your office’s assistance in securing permission from national authorities though the Sports and Recreation Commission to hold its AGM of its members on January 30, 2021 and an elective process on February 7 at our Sports Club Hall in Bulawayo,” part of the letter read. Highlanders promised to abide by all COVID-19 guidelines during the meetings and seek assistance from the police. Nominations for the elections were closed on Saturday and verification of the candidates would be done today at the club offices. Kenneth Mhlophe and Johnfat Sibanda on Saturday submitted their papers for the chairmanship while Israel Moyo and Morgen “Gazza” Dube handed in theirs for the secretary-general’s post. Bheka Sibanda and Mgcini Sibanda are vying for the commitee member’s position. Club legend Netsai Moyo pulled out of the secretary-general race later on Friday after realising he had breached constitutional requirements to contest in the election as he was not up to date with his membership subscriptions. Follow Fortune on
Twitter @fmbele