BY SHARON SIBINDI MULTI-AWARD-WINNING Zimbabwean rapper Asaph is among the continent’s top artistes vying for this year’s edition of the MTV Africa Music Awards (MAMAs) to be held virtually scheduled for February 20 in Kampala, Uganda. According to the list of nominees announced on Wednesday by the awards organisers, the Bulawayo-based rapper and country representative is eyeing the gong in the Pan-African Listener’s Choice Category, where he will battle for honours with 20 African artistes. The Like So singer came first after BET winner Shasha, Winky D, Gemma Griffiths and Jah Prayzah. In an interview with NewsDay Life & Style yesterday, ViacomCBS Networks Africa’s (VCNA), senior vice-president and general manager Monde Twala said fans across the continent could vote for their favourite artistes. “Twenty artistes from 18 African countries will now go head-to-head against one another. The winner will be revealed at the MTV Africa Music Awards Kampala 2021 that will be hosted virtually in partnership with Uganda, the Pearl of Africa, on 20 February,” he said. Twala said The Listeners’ Choice category gave music lovers across the continent the opportunity to have their voices heard. “The majority of the list of finalists for this (The Listeners’ Choice) category was determined by votes on local radio stations and social media, selecting the best publicly-voted musicians from different African countries,” he said. “The MAMA is all about bringing the music to the people, celebrating the best that Africa has to offer and uniting us through African youth culture.” The event organisers in a statement said the MAMA awards recognised and rewarded musicians, trailblazers and those who are a shining light on the continent’s diverse talent and creativity by having a positive impact on African music and youth culture over the previous year. “The MAMA also provides the opportunity to expand the African narrative by showcasing Uganda’s diversity, culture, talent, heritage and wildlife, to a global audience,” part of the statement read. The nominees for the Listeners’ Choice category are; Anna Joyce (Angola), Asaph (Zimbabwe), Dagi D (Ethiopia), DBN Gogo & DJ Dinho (South Africa), Didi B (Cote D’Ivoire), Drizilik (Sierra Leone), Focalistic (South Africa), Khaligraph Jones (Kenya), Locko (Cameroon), Malome Vector (Lesotho), Meddy (Rwanda), Mohamed Ramadan (Egypt), Ngaaka Blindé (Senegal), Pallaso (Uganda), Rayvanny (Tanzania), Sarkodie (Ghana), Shirazee (Benin), Slick Stuart & DJ Roja (Uganda), Souhila Ben Lachhab (Algeria) and Tiwa Savage from Nigeria. Follow Sharon on Twitter @SibindiSharon