BY FORTUNE MBELE HIGHLANDERS is likely to postpone its annual general meeting (AGM) and elections following new COVID-19 lockdown regulations imposed by the government at the weekend All sporting activities and gatherings have been banned once again as COVID-19 cases continue to spike and the Highlanders meeting was expected to attract more than 200 delegates. The new strict regulations will be reviewed on January 30 and Highlanders AGMs are held usually on the last Sunday of January with elections being held a week later, if its an election year. Highlanders chief executive Nhlanhla Dube yesterday said the club leadership would map the way forward on the constitutional requirements that could be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. “The government is the superordinate administrative authority in the country and it goes without saying that we will, as always and particularly in a state of a pandemic such as we are in, abide by the directives that have been communicated. Regarding our constitutional processes that is the AGM and elections, the club leaders will consider the situation and map the way forward,” Dube said. Dube said the obtaining scenario would impact the club negatively, but he acknowledged that they had no choice. Last year’s mid-term extra-ordinary general meeting was shelved because of the COVID-19 pandemic. “It goes without saying that this is a very difficult situation for the club on various levels. However, we must remain focused on the importance of life and good health for our fellow citizens, fans, players, coaches and staff and do all that we can to avert loss of life. Football will return one day and it will be good for it to find us alive,” he said. Three executive posts are up for grabs this year with the chairman, secretary-general and committee member’s positions being contested. Chairman Kenneth Mhlophe is being challenged by Johnfat Sibanda while Victoria Falls-based Morgen Dube is eying the secretary-general’s post with two candidates Bheka Sibanda and Mgcini Mafu vying for the committee member’s post. Incumbent secretary-general Israel Moyo is yet to declare if he is seeking re-election while committee member Wisdom Mabhena is no longer eligible to contest as he has seen through two successive terms, a constitutional requirement. l Follow Fortune on Twitter @fmbele