BY SILAS NKALA PRESIDENT Emmerson Mnangagwa has been urged to rein in government officials who have been flouting COVID-19 regulations by hosting parties, which were potential spreaders of COVID-19. This was said by a Matabeleland-based pressure group Ibhetshu likaZulu, which said the COVID-19 statistics were clear that Harare was seriously contaminated with the coronavirus and, therefore, the need for top government officials to act in a responsible manner. Ibhetshu likaZulu secretary-general Mbuso Fuzwayo also said there must be a ban on all travel to and from the capital, Harare as the move will save the nation from the spread of the deadly virus. “We note with great concern the increase in COVID-19 cases and deaths across the country in general and in the capital city, Harare, to be specific. We are, however, still saddened by the lack of government seriousness in response to this global pandemic,” Fuzwayo said. “We, therefore, call upon government to seriously consider immediately shutting down travel from and to the capital in order to contain the virus and in the interest of national security. It appears the city is hugely contaminated with the virus. We are persuaded that movement to and outside will be one of the ways that will spread the virus, outstretching the limited resources available.” Fuzwayo said evidence on the ground showed that senior government officials were holding parties in clear violation of government laws on COVID-19. “We call upon Mnangagwa to rein in his errant government officials. The action by his ministers is not only selfish, but it undermines the government of this country — a government they purport to serve. This is a threat to national security, as the country continues to lose lives,” he said. Fuzwayo also said that government should consider decongesting prisons as they were a breeding ground for the spread of the coronavirus. His statement comes soon after government last Wednesday gathered 450 to 500 people at Emakhandeni Hall in Bulawayo to receive faming inputs under the Presidential Inputs Scheme, in total violation of COVID-19 regulations. The country has so far lost four ministers to COVID-19, Perrance Shiri (Agriculture), Ellen Gwaradzimba (Manicaland Provincial Affairs), Sibusiso Moyo (Foreign Affairs) and Joe Biggie Matiza (Transport), while several other government ministers and officials, as well as top Zanu PF members are reportedly hospitalised or on self-quarantine due to the virus. Follow Silas on Twitter @silasnkala