The financial world is evolving, presenting a plethora of new opportunities for entrepreneurs. One of the most significant developments of recent years has been cryptocurrency. It has, undoubtedly, changed the ways many businesses interact with one another and clients and has, perhaps, more importantly, opened the doors for a budget-friendly, investment opportunity to many people.  Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, has been the talk of the town recently. More and more businesses seem to be jumping on the crypto bandwagon including Microsoft, Wikipedia, PayPal, Venmo, Etsy, BMW, and much more.  The bitcoin train is moving fast and it might just be the right time for small businesses to consider incorporating it. Therefore, here are 4 reasons why SMEs should consider entering the daunting but rewarding crypto space: Lower Transactions Fees. Bitcoin uses Blockchain technology which allows it to remain decentralized and to not rely on any intermediary such as a bank or the government to process or affect your financial transactions. This directly means much lower transaction costs.  Even if 3-5% of your merchant transaction fee seems to be a drain on your cash flow, Bitcoin is a great way to overcome that problem.  Any small business can easily send or accept bitcoins as payments with almost no fees attached. Also, since it doesn’t require any third party to verify each transaction, there won’t be any need to sacrifice your own revenue to the financial institutions that may own your business loans or credit cards. Faster Cross Border Payments For businesses that export goods and services or deal with international trade on the regular, the foreign costs can be massive. Adopting bitcoin into the payment system may prove to be a very worthwhile solution in such circumstances. This is because bitcoin is a global currency and ignores any and all border restrictions. As long as the other party accepts bitcoin, there is nothing else to be concerned about. Or perhaps, maybe the fees aren’t the real issue but the delay in receiving payment is which is eventually leading to liquidity problems within the business. The best solution to your problems, in this case, would also be bitcoin. Since there are no intermediaries involved in the transaction process and it is completely digital, there are no unnecessary delays that will hold back your payment. No Payment Disputes. Now, even though bitcoin is entirely digital, it works more like cash than credit. Bitcoin transactions once completed, cannot be contested by any customer for any reason. If you’re small business has been getting into quarrels and disputes over service provided or the price while completing their credit card payments, then bitcoin may be the saving grace you’re looking for. Acts As An Investment Opportunity. Like fiat currency, Bitcoin also fluctuates in value. However, it operates in a much more volatile market and hence, is generally less stable than payments for example made in cash or gold. And even though the constant flux may seem like an undeniable drawback of this digital asset, it can have a large upside as well. The dynamic crypto market can also make this a great investment opportunity. Since Bitcoin’s inception in 2009, it has been subject to a lot of criticism due to its volatility but with time, skeptics and would-be investors seem more inclined towards it because of all the benefits it has to offer to not only people but businesses as well. Another key reason for its unwavering success has been the greater availability of trading platforms such as bitcoin era official, allowing people to maintain profitability without even active participation in trading. Thus, there are now more opportunities than ever to invest in bitcoin and reap its benefits by either using a trading program, HODling it, or using some other strategy.