Dubai based businesswoman and human rights defender, Edith Chibhamu, has partnered with Israeli’s Dan Niv of Koral Consulting to change the infrastructure development in Africa. Speaking about the partnership and their vision for Africa, Chibhamu told this publication that plans to roll out the projects are at an advanced despite being partially blocked by Covid-19 pandemic. “Despite the massive national lockdowns due to the scourge of the second wave of Covid pandemic in Africa, I have already submitted designs of the first 3-bed low cost houses that sit on 100 square meters” she said The company through their financial partners have already secured funds to start on projects and have so far signed contracts with a few African countries to build low cost houses, sewer systems, and water reticulation. “We want to bring a total revolution to the way Africans view things especially on low cost housing and national infrastructure development. Our main focus will be on quality low cost houses, roadworks, sewer systems with modern technology to convert sewer to energy and other agricultural products, water reticulation, drainage systems in major cities in Africa” Chibhamu said Both partners expressed concern over the manner in which other infrastructural and housing companies are extorting peoples’ hard earned cash, but still providing substandard structures. “We want to urge other infrastructural and housing companies to value human life before thinking of massive profits. There must be a culture shift from the way businesses view Africa, if we start to focus on building our Africa now, then definitely we will reach Western standards in a shortest space of time ” the partners concurred As a pan-Africanist Chibhamu believes that Africans deserve decent shelter just like any other human beings living in the western world. Chibhamu also urged African leaders to change their mindset of being beggars of the West and start working on developing their economies. Chibhamu has been with Koral Consulting https://www.koral-corporate.com/ which is headquartered in Israel and branches in South Africa, Ghana, Dubai and Zambia. Edith Chibhamu is business woman and human rights defender based in Dubai. She can be contacted on @official_queendee