There may be a lot of investment options available in this world that you can choose from But none of them can match the excellence of bitcoins. Bitcoin is one of the virtual currencies that are available nowadays for the purpose of investments, trade and also making payments at several levels.It is a huge value of bitcoins which does not allow people to use it in day to day life but its first purpose was to serve the day to day life of the people. It was meant to be given away and taken in exchange of goods and services. This was the main reason which was specified by the creator of the bitcoins. Well, now the market trend has completely changed and bitcoins are not used for day-to-day life expenses.On the contrary, bitcoins are looked as a very good way for making profits. You can also call bitcoins as the new way of profit-making as it is a crypto currency and it has a very high value in the market nowadays. If you are willing to make profits, you should know about bitcoins in detail and we are going to tell about it in the forthcoming information.  Some features you should know Bitcoins are loaded with a lot of features that makes it the perfect currency to be traded in. There could be many other options that you may choose to trade into but they are not going to be as beneficial as bitcoins for you. Some of the very extraordinary features of the bitcoins which makes it a perfect investment for you are given as follows. When it comes to the incredible features which makes the bitcoin a perfect investment, you can never forget the low-cost that is associated with the trading. Several trading options are available but they are subjected to a lot of extra costs which can never be a beneficial thing for you. You will have to pay extra charges for trading into something that you have already earned and it is not an ideal way of using your money. Rather than investing money in the cost associated with the your investment, you should go with something which offers low cost trading like bitcoins. Another most important feature because of which bitcoin trading is considered to be the best option is its availability. No matter what time it is no matter where you are, you can trade in the bitcoins whenever and wherever you are from. This feature of bitcoin allows you to have complete freedom of your bitcoins. You do not have to look at anything before you do trade in the market of bitcoins. 24×7 availability of the market also comes with 24×7 availability of the customer support service which is a very great incentive. Well, when it comes to the storage of your wealth in the other options, the money is only physically existing and you need some locker for it. However, this case is completely different with the bitcoins because you do not need any physically existing place for storing your money. There are several options available where you can store your bitcoins for safety and security. There are a lot of Internet-based wallets available nowadays that you can use for storing your bitcoins. Some of the most common types of wallets that you can choose from our hardware wallet, software wallet and also Internet-based wallets. Last but not the least, another incredible Feature that makes bitcoin superior to other investment options is its high liquidity. If you know a little about the bitcoins, you may be well aware of the fact that bitcoins is the highest valued cryptocurrency nowadays. There is no other currency as valuable as bitcoin which makes it highly liquid. Anyone in the bitcoin crypto currency exchange would always be available to buy your bitcoins in exchange for cash. Final words In a nut shell, bitcoin is considered to be a perfect investment option due to the above given four features. There are several other features as well but if you want to discover them, you will have to dive into the world of bitcoin trading and enjoy them yourself at Bitcoin Freedom.