BY MIRIAM MANGWAYA THE State yesterday opposed bail for Harare City Council town clerk Hosiah Chisango, who is facing charges of criminal abuse of office, arguing that he would continue victimising municipal police officers who are witnesses in his case if he is set free. The investigating officer in the case, Vengai Sibanda, told Harare magistrate Ngoni Nduna that Chisango was not eligible for bail as he would interfere with witnesses since investigations were underway. The municipal police officers are assisting with investigations on illegal land deals within the council. “He attempted to serve another suspension letter to the chief security officer and to quite a number of municipal supervisors to frustrate investigations on land deals. Therefore, the accused cannot be granted bail as he is instilling fear on the witnesses,” Sibanda said. Chisango was not asked to plead when he appeared before Nduna on Friday, but was remanded in custody. The State led by prosecutor Lancelot Mutsokoti alleges that on December 24, 2020, Chisango unlawfully directed the Public Safety Division, through a memorandum to stop reporting to the chamber secretary, and report to him. The directive was supposed to have been issued after consultations with council authorities. The State alleges that Chisango designed the new reporting structure so that he had direct control of that department, which was behind the investigation on shady land deals within council. Leading evidence from Sibanda, the State also argued that Chisango was likely to go outside the country to his close associates and abscond trial if granted bail, given that the Zimbabwean borders are porous. “I am reliably informed that as a town clerk, the accused travels to several counties in Africa and beyond. Therefore, he has some links abroad and thus he is likely to abscond trial if granted bail,” Sibanda said. He also told the court that prior to his attempt to suspend Harare City Council chief security officer Collen Tongowona, Chisango convened a meeting, soliciting for support from the municipal police officers and supervisors, but he hit a brick wall. But Chisango argued that he could not go abroad as the borders were closed, owing to the COVID-19 pandemic. He is out on bail on another matter of criminal abuse of office. Follow Miriam on Twitter
@FloMangwaya