guest column:Johannes Marisa COVID-19 is hitting harder than before and on January 5, 2021, Zimbabwe recorded its highest daily infection cases and mortality. Those who ever doubted the existence of the virus I think by now appreciate the gravity of the pandemic, which has claimed close to two million people and infected at least 87 million others globally. Many lives may have been lost, but were not included in the official statistics because of inefficient data collation, transmission and ignorance. Recently, we woke up to the news that South Africa had a deadly strain of the COVID-19, 501.V2. The strain is said to spread very fast and results in serious complications within few days. It seems it’s among us now, with almost all hospital beds full in Harare. The demand for beds and oxygen continues to rise. The situation on the ground is dire, hence the need for people to be extra careful. COVID-19 containment and mitigation is the obligation of you and me. Government has reverted to level 4 lockdown after an alarming number of cases were reported. This means that only essential services will be allowed to operate at the moment while large gatherings are banned, that include weddings, church services, musical concerts et cetera. Police officers and soldiers have been deployed to enforce the lockdown and this culminated in long queues at roadblocks. While we appreciate the role played by security personnel manning roadblocks, we as medical professionals doing the work on the ground have been left stranded on a number of occasions because of the delays at some checkpoints. Hospitals have been overrun by patients, while staff are exhausted because of pressure at work. Oxygen has been in high demand since mid-December and we have been going to and fro to BOC Gases to fill our tanks. Medical professionals have been affected left, right and centre and many of them have suffered from secondary traumatic stress disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and depressive disorders. Life has not been easy for the medical professionals hence there is greater need for appreciation of these important fighters in the COVID-19 struggle. Considering that COVID-19 is a medical emergency that makes use of medical staff as the frontliners, it is imperative that these professionals be allowed easy passage at the roadblocks. If police delay doctors, nurses, pharmacists for four hours at a roadblock like at Mabvuku turn-off, then I wonder why there should be a lockdown in the first place. On Monday, our clinic truck carrying four oxygen cylinders was delayed for close to three hours and we ended up losing a patient because of desaturation. We had to seek the assistance of a police commissioner in order to be allowed to pass so that the driver could deliver the oxygen. Honestly, why does the police deploy officers who cannot spare a second to listen to frontliners such as doctors, nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists? If you delay doctors at a roadblock while they are rushing to attend to patients at Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals, then there will be no one to assist the patients? Such unfortunate incidents should not be allowed to happen because all our gains in the COVID-19 fight may be reversed in a short period of time. Medical staff should be treated with honour and respect in this era because they are doing their best to contain the spread of the deadly virus. Many people are very sick and need their attention in the COVID-19 battle. In view of the delays which are affecting the frontliners, I suggest the following should be done as a matter of urgency: Allow easy passage at roadblocks of medical workers who are critical in defending the country against COVID-19. Police officers at roadblocks should allow the medical workers to pass without delay. Vilifying medical people who can attend to you even the next day is tantamount to self-destruction. The COVID-19 fight is for everyone and it needs whole-hearted co-operation and unity. Both Warren Park and Mabvuku turn-off roadblocks should improve and Police Commissioner-General Godwin Matanga should be made aware of what is happening. We are not resting as practitioners, the real foot soldiers on the ground. I suggest that Zimbabwe Medical Association, Medical and Dental Private Practitioners Association, Zimbabwe Nurses Association, Zimbabwe Progressive Nurses Association, Allied Associations should issue stickers bearing the names of their respective members. Fake exemption letters that result in unnecessary congestion should be weeded out quickly. Corruption has been allowed to flourish at the detriment of the health of the nation. We do not want to be burdened as medical practitioners because of other people’s egotism and greed. The real essential service providers should not be delayed.
Lastly, health education is essential to enlighten our people about the virulence of COVID-19. Delayed treatment for COVID-19 has been shown to result in complications. Seek treatment early, we want you to survive!