Cryptocurrencies, mainly Bitcoin was a unique idea that surfaced on the planet back in 2008. Bitcoin is only one of the several cryptocurrencies that have been introduced up till now but it is still the most popular one. Transactions that are done through Bitcoin are verified and recorded on blockchains. A blockchain is a time stamped series of immutable records of data that is managed by a systematically joined group of computers. However, it is not controlled by an authoritative entity and with the help of cryptographic principles the data recorded on blockchains is verified and secured. It is a decentralized system, which offers more personal space and privacy to the users. It is a completely transparent system which allows users to see the information being shared but everyone is held accountable for their actions. Success of Cryptocurrency as a Payment Gateway Modern payment gateways are methods of digital transactions where the buyers and sellers receive payments in the form of cryptocurrencies. It is software that helps the customer and seller to access the products or services and pay in the form of digital money. It allows its user to pay in more than one cryptocurrency with the help of a crypto wallet where all the transactions are recorded and the currency is stored. They are easily accessible and are very cheap to work with. A market’s only purpose is to provide facilitation, crypto payment gateways have made that work so easy for their customers because it facilitates the customers to a significant extent. Hence, helping them store, send or receive cryptocurrencies from their clients very easily and effectively. Businesses make new payment gateways as a way for their business to stand out, as traditional payment gateways have proven to be problematic in the last few years. It eliminates the need for third party interference in the transactions, and its comparatively negligible transaction fee makes it more reliable and efficient. The crypto sphere is progressing as the day goes by and giving us a chance to embrace a new method of making our assets safer. Payment gateways manage high volume transactions at a very low cost. Role of Reliable Trading Platforms. As the trend of crypto trading has increased over the last few years, many trading platforms, like the Bitcoin Equaliser app have emerged in the market. It is a payment gateway that allows its customers to easily transfer cryptocurrency between merchants and buyers. These platforms use artificial intelligence (AI) to secure and analyze huge chunks of data correctly, simultaneously with trading algorithms. A subset of the technology known as AI is machine learning (ML) allows this app to change with the changing market dynamics. These platforms use reliable encryption methods in order to secure their users’ safety and privacy. It guarantees that no outsider can steal their client’s information or can manipulate any transaction. Plus, they provide trading signals and predictions to their users to increase their chances of making huge profits. Their customer service gives 24/7 support to its users and takes them through the whole trading experience. Hence it is wise for new traders and investors to sign up to bitcoin equaliser, in order to kickstart their crypto trading career.