BULAWAYO — It was a double murder that shocked and angered the small community of Mangwe, Matabeleland South. Pensioners Nicholas Nleya (83) and his wife Margaret Nleya (78), had retired to bed in their sprawling dream home in Empandeni, Plumtree, on September 1 last year when police said they were beaten to death and their house set on fire. Their bodies were burnt beyond recognition, but the family soon discovered that what they thought was a robbery gone bad was not quite as it seemed.
Valuables like a television set and solar panels were not touched, although doors were not locked in the rooms next to the couple’s bedroom. The Nleya family and community are about to relive that tragedy after police made a breakthrough on Sunday with the arrest of the couple’s youngest son.
National police spokesman Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi confirmed the arrest of Liseni Nleya (45) in connection with the heinous murder of his parents in premeditated fashion. Nyathi said: “The suspect was arrested on January 10 in Bulawayo after a tip-off from members of the public as he wanted to collect his clothes from a certain prophet after coming from South Africa. He confessed to killing the victims and burning their bodies. Investigations are in progress.” The family was informed on Sunday of the arrest, according to a family source who spoke to ZimLive.
Hours after the Nleya couple’s murder, a WhatsApp audio circulated implicating their youngest child in the murder — but few couldn’t contemplate he was capable of such evil. In that audio, the speaker said Lisani, a former soldier, was the black sheep of the family after failing to match the success of his siblings.
The audio claimed that Lisani had repeatedly made threats to kill his parents, accusing them of bewitching him and stunting his personal success. Police sources said Lisani was arrested after returning from South Africa over the weekend. He admitted to committing the murder. He was taken to the crime scene on Monday by Bulawayo CID detectives for indications, and will appear in court on Tuesday morning. The Nleya couple — both retired teachers — is survived by 10 children, six of whom travelled from their bases in Canada, the United Kingdom and South Africa to bury them.
— Staff Reporter/Agencies