Players all over the world are going online to indulge in some online bingo. With more styles on offer than ever before, it’s safe to say that this game is truly on the rise! From speed bingo to regular bingo to everything else on offer, the sheer variety of game is fascinating in itself! To learn out more about online bingo sites head over to www.bingosites.co.uk which provides useful game guides and reviews of the top bingo sites. In this article, we will take a look at how to play bingo for beginners. We will go deep into the amazing universe of online bingo sites to offer a look at those games that you may enjoy playing! So, without further ado, let’s take a peek at our guide on how to play bingo for beginners. The quickest growing form of bingo on the web, thirty ball bingo is usually called speed bingo in the business. In general, this style of game utilises nine numbers inside a grid of three squares by three. Many see speed bingo as the future of the game! This type of bingo game provides smaller prizes because of its short nature. With that said, it is still possible to win big with speed bingo! In America, punters love 75 ball bingo and it can be a great way for beginners to get involved too. This is a variation on classic bingo that uses cards with five columns and five rows, so twenty-five numbers in total. You can gain victory by using vertical, horizontal and diagonal lines, whilst styles and some different conditions also able to secure the win. In terms of eighty ball bingo, there are sixteen numbers on your card. Generally online only, this bingo game uses columns with numbers from a chosen span. So, one column could use numbers 21-30 and then another might show 31-40 etc. How to win? It’s simple! Get one of a range of patterns and lines to secure the prize! Players are often able to locate the conditions for winning somewhere on the card itself, on the back usually. This means you need to stay sharp when playing this kind of bingo! This variation on bingo is the longest we see online and it tends to be made up of three rounds to split things up and make the game more manageable. Ninety ball is often the most popular type of game, with a wide range of sites providing their own take on it. Often, this variation of bingo uses a card with three rows of five columns, meaning that there will be fifteen boxes in total. The numbers are assigned to their boxes, making this bingo game unusual when compared with other types of bingo. In conclusion, bingo can be a really fun game for beginners! Although frequently changing depending on the nature of the game, online bingo is founded on basic principles and as long as you pay close attention at all times, you should be able to win a fair amount!