BY FREEMAN MAKOPA FOR decades local filmmakers and stakeholders have tried hard to come up with different productions for both big and small screens in a bid to resuscitate the industry. Projects that have been produced range from dramas, short skits, movies to comedies. In an effort to offer something different, local filmmaker Shaun Mundawarara last week launched the country’s first superhero series titled Captain Mufombi. Mundawarara who is also the producer of the series told NewsDay Life & Style that he decided to produce the superhero movie in an efforts to help transform the local film industry. He said it started off as a small skit that gained traction resulting in him making it a series. “Captain Mufombi is actually a web series, so this is the first episode which we released today. We created it initially as a skit on our YouTube platform PANO TV,” he said. “The initial skit did well and people asked for more, so we decided to make it into a full series, the plan is to have an eight-episode first season and see where we go from there.” Mundawarara said the series’ synopsis revolved around two lovebirds who were struck in a rut not having money. However, their lives changed when Badwa was electrocuted and woke up hours later with supernatural powers. “The life of Badwa and his girlfriend Patty is moving ever slow, but all changes one day when the latter asks him to change the light bulb in the house and he gets electrocuted. About six hours later, he wakes up feeling weird and discovers that he can produce electric energy and charge up devices,” he said. “Sounding like a good business idea, Bandwa and Patty start a new business, Super Boost Charge, offering to charge people’s phones in the small community and the business takes a quick turn for the worse when phones start blowing up.” He said they were still mobilising resources to market the series. “We are still in the process of searching for sponsors for the series, but the audience is every Zimbabwean, those at home and in the diaspora to just have something to enjoy and have a laugh about even in these tough times,” he said. Mundawarara is among the several local filmmakers who are making great strides to ensure that the industry gets back on its feet. Follow Freeman on Twitter @ freemanmakopa