As the end of the month is near and despite how you try and crunch your numbers, you ware still short on money. Gallup poll stated that 2/3 of Americans do not keep an eye on their monthly expenses compared to how much they earn, but do you? Maybe you have been unfortunate enough to be struck by an unexpected expense, and there is no extra funds to cover it. If you are one of many, who are looking to earn extra income online, then please continue to read – as this article can help you earn money for those rainy days. If you are on of those people who spend a lot of their time online, then why not get paid for it? Many companies would like to know if their website is easy to use, and if not what ways are they able to improve it? You may be able to get paid $10 for simply visiting a website, or giving an app a go as a tester and offering any insights. A lot of people are too busy to pick up their clothes from the dry cleaners, or even assembling their furniture, which is a good thing for you. You may be asking me why is this? Well I will tell you. These people are willing to pay for these tasks to be completed. All you have to do is sign up to become a “Tasker” for a company called ‘TaskRabbit’. This site connects people who need errands and odd jobs completing.  If you are a lover of online quizzes or occasionally complete surveys from time to time, then again why not make money from this? Give your opinion with market research companies, as many would like to know what people really think about certain topics. Please see some survey sites that I would personally recommend.  As we all know you can save money by shopping when the sales are on, or inputting coupon codes when checking out online. Some places even offer rewards for certain purchases. Why not earn an extra amount back with each purchase in exchange for gift cards of cash? Simply get paid for shopping by signing up to these sites.  Nowadays, all you have to do is go online and everyone is deemed to be a photographer. All you need is a smartphone camera, maybe filters and a photography app. You are now able to sell your photos, they will be used as stock photography. For all you know you could be sitting on money with the images in your camera roll!! Some websites where you can sell your photos are: You can literally earn money online fast if you know the right places to look. However, before you sign up to any website I would suggest that you look online at their reviews; just for piece of mind that you will not be wasting your time. Put some extra money in your account this month with the tips I have given, and you will find your own ways to make use of those hours you spend online.