BY FORTUNE MBELE SOUTH AFRICAN football publication, kickoff.com, has listed Warriors’ and Lamontville Golden Arrows striker Knox Mutizwa among players that Kaizer Chiefs could target in the coming July/August transfer window. Mutizwa has been in blistering form of late after a slow start to the 2020/21 DStv Premier League season. He recently scored two goals in the league, which helped push Abafana Besthende to position four on the table and was at the top of his game on Saturday despite his side losing to AmaZulu in a penalty shoot-out after a 1-1 draw in regulation time in the preliminary round of the Nedbank Cup. Kaizer Chiefs coach Gavin Hunt told kickoff.com that he had a long list of players that he was targeting for the struggling giants come July when Amakhosi goes onto the market after a long time. The publication has thrust Mutizwa among six strikers on a list of 20 players that they say Kaizer Chiefs might be targeting to sign during the July/August transfer period. The other strikers include SuperSport United’s Bradley Grobler, AmaZulu’s Bongi Ntuli, Evidence Makgopa of Baroka, Craig Martin of Cape Town City and Maritzburg United duo of Daylon Claasen and Thabiso Kutumela. However, Hunt, who joined Kaizer Chiefs at the beginning of the season after Bidvest Wits sold its franchise to Tshakatshuma Tsha Madzivhandila, has not mentioned names despite admitting he had a long list of players he was targeting to strengthen his squad. “Like anybody, I’ve got a list longer than my arm, but that’s all pie in the sky. It’s like saying you want this one but you know it’s not possible. Realistically, we obviously looking at targets, like any other team. We haven’t done it for some time now and that’s pretty much basically how it works. But what’s attainable and what’s not attainable is always a problem, so we have got to be realistic,” Hunt said. Chiefs sit on an unfamiliar position eight on the table after playing 15 games with only four wins, six draws and five defeats and on Sunday were bundled out of the Nedbank Cup by lowly Richards Bay, who compete in the second-tier GladAfrica Championship. Amakhosi last made signings in January 2019 following a two-window transfer Fifa ban, with appeals against the censure hitting a brickwall. Mutizwa also had a splendid 2019/20 Absa Premier Soccer League season in which he scored 13 goals in the league, challenging for Golden Boot award for the better part of the season. His compatriots Khama Billiat and Willard Katsande have their contracts at Chiefs coming to an end in June. Billiat is targeted by clubs in North Africa, with his former coach at Mamelodi Sundowns Pitso Mosimane, now at Egyptian giants Al Ahly, eyeing a re-union with the Warriors’ star. However, reports in South Africa suggest Billiat could be extending his stay at Naturena.