UNITED Kingdom-based building materials supplier, Vaka Building Materials and Hardware has gone into partnership with Hearty construction to supply the company with building materials. “At Vaka we continue to strive to provide a one stop shop for building in Zimbabwe. Its good to have a company like Hearty Construction join the Vaka family .Customers  in the diaspora can now have construction services provided for them by Hearty Construction. This is evidence of trust in the Vaka brand as a one stop building partner,” said Vaka chief executive officer, Tapiwa Kundoro . Hearty construction specialises in building a home, complex, office or any kind of structure takes experience and perfection. The company also offers plumbing ,project management and consultancy services. Plumbing  services include repair, replacement and service of plumbing systems during the warranty period. We can offer both our commercial and domestic clients a full professional plumbing service that is both efficient and cost effective. On project management , the company offers cost control is one of the prerequisites for successful construction, and comprehensive construction management ensures an overall perspective during all stages of construction. Hearty Construction Managing Director Emmaculate Mhloro-Hashiti said was looking forward to a smooth  working relationship with Vaka Building Materials. “Its an amazing opportunity to work with Vaka Building Materials  that has been in the industry for a longest time. We are looking forward to provide quality services with quality products from Vaka Building Materials,” she said Vaka provides building materials to Zimbabweans in the diaspora and at home. Customers can buy building materials from the comfort of their homes from anywhere in the world. Vaka is a one stop building partner and has transformed how people buy building materials in Zimbabwe. With back offices in South Africa, United Kingdom and USA and branches in Harare, Gweru and Bulawayo and a distribution network that supplies all over Zimbabwe, Vaka has helped many Zimbabweans in the diaspora to build homes back in Zimbabwe. The company also offers services like solar systems, chase contractors, house plans, property management, car hire, groceries, plumbing and Vaka fuel.