BY TERRY MADYAUTA Former FC Platinum centreback Kelvin Moyo has been named one of the team captains at Zambia’s Nkana FC. With less than a month into his stay at the Zambian top division side, coach Kelvin Kaindu has bestowed his faith on the Bulawayo-born defender to steer the team to better strides this season. Nkana, the Zambia Super League defending champions, are not having the best of seasons on the domestic front, but their continental assault seems to be well on track following an important Confederations Cup win against Morocco’s TAS Casablanca on Sunday. And Moyo, who was signed as part of Kaindu’s defence reinforcements, is brimming with confidence that he will use his new role at the club to help them reinvent themselves in all competitions. The 27-year-old said: “It’s a great honour and a great feeling to be made captain of Nkana FC. Nkana are a big club and it is also a big opportunity for me as an individual to grow. “I welcome this chance with both hands, especially during this big stage of the Confederations Cup. This will boost my confidence since I am new here and I thank the coach who has shown belief in me. It’s a dream come true.” The former FC Platinum and Chippa United player was the captain when Nkana beat Morocco’s TAS Casablanca 2-0 in a Confederations Cup play-offs first leg played at Nkana Stadium on Sunday afternoon. He is hopeful that the captaincy role, which he shares with former Yadah FC defender Jimmy Dzingai and Musa Muhammed, will not distract him from reviving himself for a possible call-up to the Warriors fold. “I will not let this distract me and I shall work very hard to help the team do well. I am very happy that I managed to get my first win as Nkana captain against TAS Casablanca. I am very happy for the whole team and that as part of the defence we managed to keep a clean sheet,” Moyo
said. “We hoped to get many goals. We still managed to grind a good result despite the bad weather. The job is not yet done, we are now looking forward to the next round.”