By Yassin Nhara THE use of excessive force with impunity by the police against civilians has, over the years, become a recurring feature in Zimbabwe. As recently as January 5, 2021, alleged reports circulated on social media that a police officer had fatally struck a nine-month-old baby with a baton stick during skirmishes with commuter omnibuses at a local bus stop, sparking widespread outrage. It was subsequently reported by the police that an incident had taken place, but that the baby had not been fatally wounded as was previously reported. Even though the police indicated that no child or person was harmed, the admission that one of their officers used a baton stick to smash the windscreen of an illegal commuter omnibus, a practice that has become characteristic of traffic enforcement, raises questions about extra-judicial punishment and public safety on the roads. The police have become a law unto themselves, operating outside the provisions of the Police Act and the Constitution, without any consequences for their actions. This occurs at the expense of the public which continues to be placed in harm’s way as a result of such rogue behaviour. Police leadership has been conspicuously quiet about these illegal law enforcement tactics by their officers; thus, by inference, indicating a tacit approval of such antics. On September 24, 2020, The Herald reported that armed police officers had opened fire on an unregistered speeding commuter omnibus, near Juru Growth Point, along the Mutoko-Nyamapanda Highway, resulting in the death of one passenger and the infliction of serious injury on another. The police did not report any remedial action taken against its officers or what sort of justice was provided to the victims. On October 13, 2020, it was reported that seven police officers threw teargas canisters into a bus full of passengers at the Harare Exhibition Park. The incident was captured on video and went viral on social media platforms, sparking public outrage at the excessive use of force by police officers. Passengers aboard the bus could be seen leaping from the windows in an effort to escape the harmful gas. Soon thereafter, it was reported that the police had stopped the bus pursuant to allegations that the driver had quarrelled with passengers and did not possess a driver’s licence. Upon approaching the bus driver, who refused to cooperate, the police officers threw teargas canisters into the bus in order to flush out the driver. Having been approached by a gathering crowd voicing its discontent at the shocking scene, the police officers sped off in their vehicle. National police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi confirmed the incident and stated that one of the offending officers had been identified and arrested in connection with the incident. The use of excessive force against civilians by members of the police force has persistently been an issue that civil society has complained about, with no corrective measures being taken by the authorities. This raises questions about policing and human rights protection. The police would better serve their citizenry if they observed the guiding principles set out by the Judiciary. These established principles ought to inform the operations of the police in their engagement with civilians, particularly as it relates to the employment of force in the execution of their duties. In the recently-decided case of Chiriseni v The Commissioner-General of Police & 2 Others, which was handed down under judgment number HH 450/20 in July 2020, it was stated that: “…the role of the police is to police situations where they are protecting the civilian body from a threat. “This is why the provisions in the Constitution provide for a non-partisan intervention from the police force. This means that the role of the police is to protect members of the public from a threat in the safest way possible. “That is the uppermost reason for involving or calling up a member of the Police to attend to a scene. The police Officer is charged with one chief and primary duty to care and that is to protect civilians from an external threat; be it one posed by other civilians or other external force.” The above construct is useful given the plethora of cases in which the police have sought to escape liability for acts of force or violence against civilians based on their blameworthiness or purported legal liability. The relevant test as outlined above, is that police officers, despite the civilian(s) being in contravention of the law, be guided by a prevailing duty of care towards the public and an obligation to protect them. In the case of Mapingure v Minister of Home Affairs and Others which was handed down under judgment number SC 22/14 in the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe in 2014, the court alluded to the preventative functions of the police in the following manner; “…the policeman is not only a deterrent and a detective but also a protector…” The duty of care incumbent upon the police is not a take away from the other functions of the police which are well enshrined in section 219 of the Constitution. In terms of section 219, the police service is mandated with the following duties:
(a) detecting, investigating and preventing crime; (b) preserving the internal security of Zimbabwe; c) protecting and securing the lives and property of the people;
(d) maintaining law and order; and
(e) upholding [the] Constitution and enforcing the law without fear
or favour. Given the continued occurrence of cases against the police service in relation to the excessive adoption of force and violence, which oftentimes is vastly disproportionate to the scene being attended to, there is a need to illuminate that such practices fall outside the ambit of the law. Commuter omnibus drivers, who have a difficult relationship with the police service on any given day, are regularly the targets of high speed chases, the deployment of spike strips and other such displays of force, which unfortunately, regularly results in innocent passengers and civilians bearing the brunt of the aftermath. The courts have established that the degree of liability that rests upon offending police officers shall be determined upon the degree of force used in relation to the duty of care obligated upon them. Furthermore, it will be considered whether or not the force employed is indiscriminate and unwarranted within the context of the circumstances. It is apparent that the legal framework currently in place, is cognisant of the pervading need to ensure the safety of civilians, particularly in relation to their engagement with the police service. In the Chiriseni case referenced above, the court aptly summed it up in the following terms: “The safeguards found in the Constitution have been legislated to ensure that the officer’s right to use force is in the exercise of his/her duty of care is consistent with the values existing in a democratic society which assumes that the public is protected. The Constitution allows the security forces to contain internal threats to security but those threats must obviously exist. It should be assumed that the security services are especially trained to exercise restraint whenever they are carrying out their duties in the presence of unarmed civilians.” In view of the above, there is an evident failure by the police service to execute its duties in balance with the duty of care that is inherent to its mandate. The use of unwarranted and excessive means to engage the public, or more specifically, to immobilise offending vehicles without due regard to the imminent public danger, clearly constitutes reckless and unlawful conduct. There is no room for the continued prevalence of excessive and unjustified use of force and violence by the police service against civilians, particularly where the law makes specific provision against it.