BY SHAME MAKOSHORI “We are delighted to announce that we have teamed up with the inspirational teams at Imire: Rhino & Wildlife Conservancy, @Parc Safari Hemmingford and @Ethiopian Airlines to rewild Kumbe and Jabari, two cheetahs born in Canada,” read an announcement on the website of the UK-based Aspinall Foundation recently. “Kumbe and Jabari flew on Saturday from Toronto to Addis Ababa on special crates on board of an Ethiopian Airlines Boeing 787-9 Dreamliner and another shorter connection to Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe. There they met with our team and Imire’s and driven to their new home at Imire Rhino & Wildlife Conservancy. The two boys will first spend 60 days in a quarantine boma to allow them to acclimatise to their new life under the African sun and practice chasing a lure to prepare for their first hunt. After the quarantine, they will move into Imire’s 4 500-hectare reserve, where they will encounter wild game and start hunting for themselves. Within a few short months we expect this handsome duo to be living completely wild and free,” said the foundation which is run by Damian Aspinall, an English businessman and conservationist. The mere thought of two sweet young cheetahs traversing the world to the African jungle simply is quite intriguing. The routine is normally that translocations originate in Africa. But here, there was a role reversal, which is rare in Zimbabwe and so NewsDay (ND) business editor, Shame Makoshori sought to understand why. He speaks to Imire Rhino and Wildlife Conservation’s conservancy manager, Reilly Travers (RT) to understand how this exciting development happened and why Canada chose Zimbabwe for the rewilding operation. ND: How did they specifically choose Imire Game Park for the destination of the cheetahs? RT: Imire is a 4 500-hectare conservancy in Mashonaland East and is an ideal release site for cheetah as it is well protected, and cheetahs ideal prey species are abundant on the property. The property is the perfect size for a two male coalition and the cheetah will not have to compete with other large predators. ND: So, how have they been doing since arrival? Are you convinced that they will adapt to our much warmer climate?