Since most people in Zimbabwe and many other countries around the world have a smartphone or a tablet, the mobile betting industry has become a lot bigger than before. Sure, there are still many bettors who prefer to use their desktop, but most people have a busy lifestyle which doesn’t allow them to have access to a computer all the time. Hence, the only way for them to enjoy their favorite hobby is by betting on the go.  In order to meet customers’ needs, many betting websites decided to develop a stand-alone mobile app for Android and iOS. Even though there are a few other mobile OS, these two dominate the market, which is why bookies and casinos focus on them. If you use something else, you will have to play via your mobile browser.  Before you take a look at the 1xbet download process (you will see that you need just a few minutes to get the app on your device), we want to point out three things you need to consider before downloading the app.  Make sure that your device has the latest firmware  The first thing you need to do before you get the app on your device is to check whether it is running on the latest firmware. If you are lucky to choose an operator with an app on Google Play or the App Store, you can check which version of Android and iOS you need to have to install the app.  That said, it is definitely advisable to use the latest update on your phone or tablet if you want to have the best possible gambling experience. Bettors who have an iPhone are in a better position because Apple’s devices are famous for receiving updates for a longer period of time.  Check if you have enough storage space  If you want to download an app, you have to make sure that your phone or tablet is not running low on storage space. The good news is that every betting app is just a few MBs (in most cases), so you probably won’t have any problem, regardless of which bookie or casino you choose.  However, you need to take into account the fact that these apps will receive updates sooner or later. Hence, you need to free up enough storage space so that you won’t have problems with them.  Check whether your device runs smoothly  One of the things that people forget to do is check whether their smartphone or tablet has any performance problems. Nowadays, most devices are powerful so it’s difficult to slow them down unless you use them all the time. However, if you have an older phone or tablet, you have to check if it opens apps smoothly.  If there are any issues like slow loading speeds, app crashes, and so on, you have to try to fix them. Otherwise, you won’t be able to have a good gambling experience, even if you download the best mobile app in the world.