SALVATION brought us to an inseparable and unbreakable union with God the Father in Christ sealed by the Holy Spirit. We live here on earth with eternal assurance and awareness. Our salvation is permanent. The Godhead dwells in us for we’re the temple of God. With this conviction, we carry out our assignments with poise, determination and certainty of completion and success. While we’re aware of other parameters or forces that oppose us, we fix our eyes on the Lordship of Jesus Christ who is the captain of our salvation. Erasmus Makarimayi Our starting point which is our standing of belief and values is the life of the risen Christ in us. Jesus Christ conquered death. Scripture tells us in Colossians 3:3, “For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.” Since our believers life or born again life is hid with Christ, we are convinced beyond doubt that the devil cannot willy-nilly pluck it out of His grip. Remember the words of Jesus in John 10:28, Amplified, “And I give them eternal life, and they shall never lose it or perish throughout the ages. [To all eternity they shall never by any means be destroyed.] And no one is able to pluck [snatch] them out of My hand.” The conscious awareness or acknowledgement that we are only vessels of divine mandate gives us boldness to execute our assignments or the cutting edge if you prefer. We are not careless in our disposition but simply make use of the inheritance of the saints. We allow God to express Himself in, by and through us in humility and excellence. In Galatians 2:20, New Living Translation, Apostle Paul puts it thus, “I myself no longer live, but Christ lives in me. So I live my life in this earthly body by trusting in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.” We trust Jesus who loves us. He loved us to the point of dying for our sins so that we are accepted by God the Father in Him. The Holy Spirit Who dwells in us is the seal that cannot be tampered with. We read in 2 Corinthians 1:21-22, Amplified, “[21] But it is God Who confirms and makes us steadfast and establishes us [in joint fellowship] with you in Christ, and has consecrated and anointed us [enduing us with the gifts of the Holy Spirit]; [22] [He has also appropriated and acknowledged us as His by] putting His seal upon us and giving us His [Holy] Spirit in our hearts as the security deposit and guarantee [of the fulfilment of His promise].” Beloved, we are sealed, consecrated or set apart for exclusive use by God. We are holy, which means that the devil and all evil machinations have no free access to us. Only our ignorance can give the devil access to play tricks with our minds. The Holy Spirit is our anchor from the day we are saved or born again till the consummation of time. We don’t live in doubt or fear and trembling in this age. Moreover looking towards the age to come we are positive. Let’s hear the gracious words in Ephesians 1:13-14, Amplified, “[13] In Him you also who have heard the Word of Truth, the glad tidings (Gospel) of your salvation, and have believed in and adhered to and relied on Him, were stamped with the seal of the long-promised Holy Spirit. [14] That [Spirit] is the guarantee of our inheritance [the first fruits, the pledge and foretaste, the down payment on our heritage], in anticipation of its full redemption and our acquiring [complete] possession of it — to the praise of His glory.” We are stamped and sealed. The seal cannot be breached. Let’s go out in dominion and conquer to give God the Father praise and honour. Nothing in this world or the world to come can separate us from the love of God in Christ. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. Grace and peace be multiplied to you through knowledge.