BY MIRIAM MANGWAYA INCREASED promiscuity in the transit town of Chivhu has prompted a local arts group, Team Folks Crew (TFC), to produce a film titled Muroora Mutsva (New Daughter-In-Law), to educate the youths about the dangers of infidelity. The film’s synopsis revolves around a young girl, Jane, (Rejoice Chiduku), the main actor in her early twenties, who grew up in poverty and engaged in promiscuous relationships. She dated her boyfriend‘s father and his friend at once, unaware that the three were related. The promiscuity was discovered after Jane got married and eloped to Lloyd (Trynos Masunda) and the marriage ended prematurely. The producer of the hour-long film Garikai Mptasi told NewsDay Life & Style yesterday that in their quest to educate the youth on the dangers of promiscuity, they engaged prominent figures such as teachers and police officers to help drive the message home. “The movie was inspired by the various challenges the youths are facing during the modern-day era where technology has overridden cultural beliefs and young people are disobeying their parents and engaging in immoral activities,” he said. “Girls are eloping and rushing into early marriages. It is, however, creating problems in those marriages because they would not be mature enough to face marital problems or to shoulder the responsibilities of parenthood.” The co-producer Masunda said TFC, a group formed by youths with various talents was committed to bringing about behaviour change in the youths through arts. “We had to come up with the film to caution those who are not yet in early marriage particularly the girl children who were engaging in prostitution with cross-border truck drivers exposing themselves to sexually transmitted diseases,” he said. “We took over three years to be able to release the film because we did not have sponsorship. Due to financial constraints, we could not meet the expenses so we had to stop production midway on several occasions.” Masunda said they were working on another film titled Munyika which explores socio-economic challenges in communities. One of the actors in the film Virginia Hundi (pictured), a teacher at Liebenberg High School, said she was proud to be part of the youth who volunteered to showcase their talents for the betterment of society. “We are not making any profit out of filmmaking, but it is about youth who are passionate about transforming their community so we had to support them,” she said. “The project is self-funded. We are appealing for financial support from well-wishers.” Follow Miriam on Twitter @MangwayaMiriam