BY SILAS NKALA BULAWAYO City Council has threatened to penalise residents who abuse water and exceed their daily limits. The warning came after the local authority partially eased the water-rationing schedule following significant inflows into the city’s supply dams. However, some residents are querying why they were put under water-rationing when the city’s supply dams were almost full. In a notice to the residents on Tuesday, town clerk Christopher Dube appealed to residents to use water sparingly and adhere to the water-rationing limits. He said household in high-density were entitled to 450 litres per day, cottages, servants’ quarters 650 litres per day, all residential flats with bulk meters 70% of average water for a six-month period. All residential flats with individual meters, he added, should use 400 litres per day, multi-purpose buildings with bulk meters should use 70% of average water for the six-month period, hotels, water-based industries, hospitals clinics, restaurants, commercial consumers, schools and churches should use 95% of average water consumption for a six-month
period. Peri-urban Esigodini, Matopos and Llewellin Barracks, Sigola and Duncan village should use 75% of average six months period, industrial consumers should use 90% of average water six months period, Mzinyathini Irrigation scheme should use 65% of entitlement for domestic consumption only for the six months period and new water connections to vacant stands and areas outside Bulawayo are suspended. “For those who exceed their water allocations, penalties will be affected on them. The current tariff for domestic users is $167 per kilolitre. Consumers are urged to monitor their water consumption daily by reading their meters. This helps detect any unnecessary loss of water,” Dube said. “The ban on use of hose pipes for gardening is reintroduced with this proposed water-rationing scheme. Construction with potable water remains prohibited. “Consumers are urged to use borehole and reclaimed water for non-portable uses. The current system will only connect those that are within the boundaries that are under development and those that will be incorporated under the new city development master plan.” The demand for water supply in Bulawayo is reportedly gradually increasing due to its expansion and resultant increase in population size.