If you want to bet on sports, you can either visit your local land-based betting shop or choose one of the many online bookmakers. Although there are bettors who prefer the first option, the vast majority of punters decide to open an account on a given online bookie because it allows them to bet on their computers.  Besides using our PCs, we can bet on our favorite sport using our smartphones and tablets. In other words, we always have access to the things we like, even if we are on the go.  If you don’t have access to a computer and want to place a bet, you can either download an app or use a given operator’s mobile site. Both things work fine, so it usually depends on which one you prefer. However, using the app is more convenient, so most bettors prefer to download and install it.  Before you do that, let’s look at a few interesting things you need to look for in every app.  Loads of sports and markets  The first thing you have to check after you download the old Bet9ja app is whether there are enough sports and markets. This is one of the most reputable bookmakers in Africa, so you should be able to access the things you like.  Regardless of which bookie you choose, you have to make sure that the app has the same things that are available on the desktop site. Most operators have copied their sportsbook, which means that it will offer the same things available on the site. Yet, some places haven’t done this before, so be careful.  Check the bonuses  One of the things that make mobile betting so appealing is the bonuses. The vast majority of gambling operators have optimized their desktop offers, which allows their customers to access them on their handheld devices.  If you are lucky, you may also come across an online bookie with a dedicated mobile bonus. Those things are still pretty rare, but if you are fortunate, you may find a mobile-promo in the future because the iGaming industry is definitely focusing on mobile clients.  Make sure you have enough features to choose from  Besides bonuses, one of the things that bookmakers use to attract new customers is features. That’s why you will find things like cash out, live streaming, edit bet, and so on. Even though those things are usually available on the desktop site, most bookies forget to optimize them for their mobile app and site. Hence, clients won’t be able to make use of them if they bet on the go.  Once you download a particular betting app, check the sportsbook or ask customer support to see whether these features are available.  Check the payment methods  Last but not least, you have to make sure there are enough payment options. The good news is that almost every bookmaker offers the same deposit and withdrawal methods as those available on its desktop site.